=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: hahn
/CreationDate: D:20220302140343+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.11.20039
/ModDate: D:20220306162225+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.11.20039
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meeting of the Board 
28 – 31 March 2022 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea
 
Provisional
 
agenda
 
item
 
1
3
 
GCF
/
B
.
31
/
02
/
Add
.
01
 
1
1
 
March
 
2022
 
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum I 
Funding proposal package for FP182
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts:
 
a)
 
A funding proposal titled "Climate-smart initiatives for climate change adaptation 
and sustainability in prioritized agricultural production systems in Colombia 
(CSICAP)"; 
b)
 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c)
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d)
 
Secretariat
’
s assessment;  
e)
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel
’
s assessment;  
f)
 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and 
g)
 
Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
       GCF/B.31/02/Add.01 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)  78 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  80 
Secretariat’s assessment  82 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   97 
Response from the accredited entit y to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment  109 
Gender documentation  111


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Project/Programme title:  Climate -smart initiatives for climate change adaptation and 
sustainability in prioritized agricultural production systems in 
Colombia  (CSICAP)  
Country(ies):  Colombia  
Accredited Entity:  Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF)   
Date of first submission:  2021/03/29  
Date of current submission  14/01/2022  
Version number  V.012


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE b OF 75 
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANNEXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60.  Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
service standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out  information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name] -[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 3 OF 75 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Project  A.2. Public or private 
sector  Public   
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP ) If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals , 
indicate  which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the 
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.  
Not applicable   
A.4. Result area(s)   
Check the applicable GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets. 
For each checked result area(s) , indicate  the estimated percentage of GCF budget  devoted to it. 
The total of the percentage s when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation:  Reduced emissions from:  
 
☐ Energy access and power generation:     
☐ Low-emission transport:      
☐ Buildings, cities , industries and appliances:    
☒ Forest ry and land use:     
  
Adaptation:  Increased resilience of:  
 
☒ Most vulnerable people, communities  and regions:   
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water security:  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment:      
☐ Ecosystem and ecosystem services:  GCF contribution:  
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
13% 
 
 
44% 
43% 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
impact  9,152,034 tCO2eq over 
lifespan  A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact   619,691 direct 
beneficiaries  
347,996 indirect 
beneficiaries . 
The direct beneficiaries are 
equivalent to 1 .21% of total 
population (7.2% of total 
agricultural producers in 
Colombia ). 
 
The indirect beneficiaries 
represent 0.68% of total 
population (4.1% of total 
agricultural producers) . 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  99,910,201 USD   
A.9. Project size  Medium (Upto USD 250 
million)  A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  73,283,080 USD  
For multi -country 
proposals, please fill out 
annex 17.  
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  Mark all that apply  and provide total amounts . The sum of all total amounts should be consistent  
with A.8.  
☒ Grant  48,283,080   
☒ Loan   25,000,000  
☐ Guarantee  Enter number  ☐ Equity   Enter number  
☐ Results -based    
     payment   Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  5 years  A.12. Total lifespan  25 years


---
*Page 6*
---

A A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 4 OF 75 
 A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval  This is the date that the 
Accredited Entity obtained/will 
obtain its own approval to 
implement the project/  
programme, if available.   
7/31/2021  A.14. ESS category  Refer to the AE’s safeguard 
policy and  GCF ESS 
Standards  to assess your FP 
category.  
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used 
to prepare this FP ? Yes ☒       No ☐ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
programme?  Yes ☒       No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Does the project/programme complement  other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, 
CIF, etc .)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information  The Government of Colombia through the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit (MHCP) 
will be the entity responsible for the project loan resources from the Green Climate Fund 
(GCF) as well as the loan resources from CAF. For its part, the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Development (MADR) will be responsible for executing the resources and 
technical implementation of the project through its Directorate of Innovation, 
Technological Development and Sanitary Protection. The CSICAP Project is presented as a national initiative under the leadership of the MADR , as executing entity (EE). MADR 
will be responsible for providing technical  guida nce for project 
implementation and 
supervising the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT ), as Procured Party, 
to ensure that all activities are executed on time and with the required quality to ensure 
the achievement of project results.  The MADR will receive technical support from the 
Alliance between Bioversity International and CIAT (part of the CGIAR, an accredited 
agency to the GCF), Agrosavia (the agricultural research institution in Colombia), 
CIMMYT, CIPAV, and producer associations (gremios )1 (ASBAMA and AUGURA -
Cenibanano (banana), ASOHOFRUCOL ( plantain), ASOCAÑA- CENICAÑA (sugar 
cane), FEDEPANELA ( panela cane), FEDECAFE -  CENICAFE (coffee), FEDEPAPA 
(potato), FEDEARROZ (rice), FENALCE (corn) and FEDEGAN (livestock)), following the 
regulations and schemes defined and allow ed under  Colombian legislation.   
A.21. Executive summary  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 pages ) 
1. The climate problem . Colombia is projected to be negatively impacted by climate change, with temperature rises, 
changes in rainfall regimes, and greater frequency and intensity of weather and climate extremes (Fowler et al., 2021; 
Kharin et al., 2018; Ramirez -Villegas et al., 2012 ). Temperatures increased by 0.13 °C per decade in 
Colombia during the period 1971- 2000, reaching 3 to 5 °C by mid- XXI century ( Arnell et al, 2004 ; IPCC, 2007; 
IDEAM, PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA, 2017 ). Climatic variations relevant to agriculture occur at a range of 
timescales (from days to multiple decades), and it is virtually certain that anthropogenically -driven climate change 
will alter climatic patterns at all those timescales ( Bindoff et al., 2013; Donat et al., 2013; Seneviratne et al., 2018 ; 
IPCC, 2021 ). More specifically, an amplification of ENSO -rainfall variability is projected by the new CMIP6 model 
ensemble ( Yun et al., 2021 ; IPCC, 2021 ). Likewise, the frequency of extreme El Niño events is expected t o increase 
with warming ( Cai et al., 2018 ; Wang et al., 2017 ). Ultimately, while robust projection of ENSO is not feasible with 
the current generation of climate models, it is clear that ENSO -related cl imate variations will continue to challenge 
agricultural production in all regions of Colombia. S trong ENSO events can severely impair agricultural productivity 
in Colombia ( Barrios -Perez et al., 2021 ).  
2. According to the Third National Communication of Colombia, climate change is expected to have a major impact on the Colombian agric ultural sector ( IDEAM, PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA, 2017
), due to both the long-
term trends in climate with progressive increase in temperature and large anomalies in the timing of periods of excessive rain and drought, as well as greatly increased variation in weather patterns with more frequent and anomalous extreme weather events. The Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) of the IPCC (
IPCC, 2021 ) Colombia is 
likely to be most challenged by extreme heat (especially in the lowland northern regions) and heavy precipitation 
events and flooding (across the Pacific  and the inter -Andean Valleys) . Unprecedented flooding events have been 
 
1 Gremio (plural gremios) refers to crop- specific private sector organizations that gathers small, medium and large- scale farmers, which aim 
to support farmers to improve competitiveness and income profitability. These organizations are nation- wide and have branches in all relevant 
areas for each specific agricultural system. Usually, the gremios provide a variety of services including, but not limited to, research and 
innovation, technical and commercial assistance, input provider, among others. Most of these gremios were established decades ago, they 
represent farmers before governmental institutions so that their needs are addressed. Some of those organizations have separate research 
and innov ation entities to support farmers.


---
*Page 7*
---

A A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 5 OF 75 
 reported in recent decades in the lower reaches of the Atrato, Cauca, and Magdalena rivers (IPCC, 2021 – Chapter 
12; Avila et al., 2019 ). Extreme precipitation can also drive landslides, with Colombia being considered one of the 
countries in Latin America with high incidence of fatal landslides. Regarding drought, it is est imated that 62% of the 
existing streamflow timeseries across the country exhibit a significant decreasing trend ( Carmona and Poveda, 
2014 ; IPCC, 2021). Of particular concern are th e northern lowlands (Caribbean region, and lower Cauca), where 
hydrological and agricultural drought affect agricultural production and livelihoods substantially current climates 
(https://interactive -atlas. ipcc.ch ; Perez et al., 2020 ; Contreras, 2019; Castro, 2019 ). As a result  of climate change, 
the supply of food and basic products, which is regularly affected by weather -related events, not only may be 
affected by reductions in crop and livestock productivity, but also by interruptions or delays in the mobilization of 
goods and services due to infrastructure damage that generates price spikes for poor urban consumers.  
3. Among the most relevant challenges in the agricultural sector generated by climate change in Colombia are: i) 
losses in the livestock sector both in number of animals and productivity; ii) crop yields  reductions ; iii) reduced 
resilience of crops to extreme shocks associated with changes in climatic variables; iv) increased variation in both 
water excess and deficit affecting irrigation water av ailability ; v) increased soil erosion; vi) more frequent deficits in 
surface soil moisture; vii) increased incidence of pests and diseases; viii) increased occurrence of unexpected fires; 
ix) reduction of the number of growing cycles; x) increase in greenhouse gas emissions  arising from livestock 
production and deforestation, and; xi) increased variation in crop yields leading to decreased food and nutritional 
security.  At the same time, it should be noted that increased CO 2 in the atmosphere will bring opportunities to 
increase water use efficiency in most crops and to higher potential yields per unit land area of the C3 crops.  
4. Because climatic variations occur at a range of timescales and these variations are all affected by long- term climate 
change, adapt ation needs to be framed accordingly. Adaptation strategies can be incremental, systemic, or 
transformational. Incremental adaptation helps respond to seasonal and interannual variations; systemic adaptation 
helps prepare for changes in the coming decades;  and transformational change involves planning agricultural 
transitions when systems are no longer viable ( Ramirez -Villegas and Khoury, 2013; Rippke et al., 2016 ). Farmers 
have limited access to practices and technologies suitable for adapting to climate change and climate variability, and can therefore experience large economic losses. Most technological packages currentl y recommended to 
farmers are adapted to average weather conditions or climate: they are not tailored to the weather conditions which 
any individual farmer actually faces. As extreme climatic events have become more intense and frequent, with the 
consequent  incidence of floods and droughts, added to rising temperature, producers have not had the tools to 
anticipate climate impacts and cope with physical and monetary losses. Furthermore, as international markets and 
global commitments respond to these sustain
ability and climate challenges through demands and technical 
requirements, countries will have to adapt their food systems to these challenges to maintain their competitiveness 
and food security. Colombia needs to accelerate programs that provide the technical and scientific required to 
provide concrete advances to resolve the problems producers face in meeting the challenge of climate change and 
to strengthen the institutional capacity to share knowledge of these advances both with and between the rural 
producers. Colombia is committed to reducing GHG but currently has limited information on how this can be 
achieved in the agricultural sector. Information is required to implement programs that minimize the GHG emissions 
in agriculture . 
5. Proposed intervention s. The Climate- smart initiatives for climate change adaptation and sustainability in 
prioritized agricultural production systems (rice, corn, banana, sugar cane, potato and cattle) in Colombia (CSICAP) 
has been formulated under the leadership of the MADR, with technical support from the alliance between Bioversity 
International and CIAT, in coordination with producer associations, AGROSAVIA and the Development Bank of Latin America (CAF), as accredited agency before the Green Climate Fund (GCF) for a total amount of USD 99.58 
million. The implementation period will be five years with a scope / impact of 25 years.  MADR will be the executing 
entity (EE) with the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) , as the main procured party . CIMMYT , 
Agrosavia, CIPAV and the gremios will act both as co- financiers and procured parties.  
6. The general objective  of the project is to reduce the vulnerability of agricultural production to climatic threats to 
minimize their impacts on the competitiveness of the agricultural sector and to have an adequate and stable 
availability of quality food by strengthening climate risk management, while reducing greenhouse gas emissions 
from agricultural production. The project seeks to change the current paradigm of agricultural production of intensive 
use of inputs, little adaptation of technologies to reduce the vulnerability of crops to droughts, floods and other 
climatic stressors. For this paradigm shift, the Project establishes three (3) purposes: (i) implement digital 
agriculture systems and climate services to modernize agricultural extension services and provide adaptati on and 
mitigation recommendations that support the reduction of agro- climatic risks and the loss of crops, while promoting 
a low -carbon pathway; (ii) develop, validate and scale -up technologies (genetic improvement, crop management 
and other technologies) to increase resilience and low -carbon agricultural development and; (iii) strengthen the 
capacities of producers, technicians, and institutions for the adoption and implementation of technologies and 
propose new business models based on the massive adoption of technologies under environmental, social, and gender considerations.  
7. The Project will have national scope on livestock and agricultural systems (rice, corn, potatoes, sugar cane, panela 
cane, livestock, coffee, bananas and plantains). The project will  have the participation of agricultural producer


---
*Page 8*
---

A A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 6 OF 75 
 associations such as: ASBAMA and AUGURA -Cenibanano (banana), ASOHOFRUCOL (banana), ASOCAÑA -
CENICAÑA (sugar cane), FEDEPANELA (sugar cane), FEDECAFE - CENICAFE (coffee), FEDEPAPA (potato), 
FEDEARROZ (rice), F ENALCE and CIMMYT (corn) and FEDEGAN and CIPAV (livestock) and, AGROSAVIA (for 
all crops).2 
8. Climate impacts and benefits. It is estimated that the Project will benefit directly more than 619,691 people, 
194,871 rural producers and their families directly and 347,996 producers  indirectly , and it is expected to increase 
the climate resilience of the agricultural system in a total of 967,997 hectares, distributed in 22 departments (69% 
of the country's departments) and 219 municipalities (20% of all municipalities). The total emissions that  the project 
expects to reduce throughout its life is 9,152,034 tCO 2e. 
 
2 The beneficiary producers do not need to be part of one of the gremios to participate in the project. By law, gremios support  their members, 
but also other producers, because the gremios receive public funding to do that.


---
*Page 9*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 7 OF 75 
 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
9. The climate problem . The agricultural sector contributed 6.2% of Colombia's total GDP (DANE, 2020); the largest 
contribution within this agricultural GDP came from temporary and permanent crops (57%), coffee (11%), livestock 
(25%), forestry and wood extraction (3.5%) and fis hing and aquaculture (2.8%).  Approximately 43 million hectares 
are used in agriculture, of which 80% correspond to pastures and uncropped or fallow land and 20% to agricultural 
use (DANE, 2016) . There are 2.4 million agricultural production units (UPA), most of which (44%) are located in the 
departments of Boyacá, Cundinamarca, Antioquia and Nariño. Land distribution is highly skewed with 70% of the 
UPA less than five hectares. The 0.2% of the UPA that are greater than one thousand hectares represent 74% of 
the dispersed rural area (dispersed rural area includes both residential and farmed land outside municipal limits (DANE, 2016). Colombia has a diverse range of climatic conditions ranging from paramos in the highlands, through cloud forest and inter -Ande an valleys to coastal deserts and tropical rainforest. Each of these distinct climates 
shows distinct characteristics in terms of both climate variability and long- term climate change trends: there is no 
single description of how climate change will influence weather patterns in the country, as these patterns depend 
of the locality. A gricultural production is distributed both in lowlands and mountainous regions where most of the 
rural population lives (DANE, 2016). Farmers, depending on their location, face a series of climate/weather related 
threats including flooding, erosion, landslides, drought, waterlogging, above- average temperatures and extreme 
events including frosts, high winds, hailstorms and in the North the tail ends of hurricanes (Feola et al., 2015; 
Barrios -Perez et al., 2021; Perez et al., 2020). These adversities are likely to increase with climate change ( IDEAM, 
PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA, 2017 ; Ramirez -Villegas et al., 2012 ). The supply of food and basic products 
is regularly affected by weather -related events, which not only directly reduce production in the field but also 
damage rural infrastructure and interrupt the supply chains, often leaving farmers with produce they cannot sell 
whilst leading to scarcity and price increases which hurt the urban poor.  
10. Colombia has and will continue to be affected by the negative impact of climate change, including higher 
temperatures, periods of intense r ain and drought, and a higher frequency of ever more extreme events. The IPCC’s 
Sixth Assessment Report ( AR6) (IPCC, 2021 ) continues  to affirm the high sensitivity that exists in water resources, 
agriculture and livestock against of climate change scenarios for Colombia.  AR6 shows more marked warming and 
observed increases in heat extremes and a positive trend for an increase in the fr equency and length of droughts  
and a decrease in the index related to cold days . This has important implications for agriculture in Colombia, 
especially for threats and risks identified in T able B.1.1.  
11. Climatic variations relevant to agriculture occur at a range of timescales (from days to multiple decades), and it is virtually certain that anthropogenically -
driven climate change will alter climatic patterns at all those timescales 
(Bindoff et al., 2013 ; Donat et al., 2013; Seneviratne et al., 2018 ). A cl ear example of altered climate variability 
resulting from climate change relates to the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO). ENSO is the most important mode of variability on Earth (
Cai et a l., 2018 ), and while 21st century ENSO projections entail high uncertainty , 
recent research suggests that the frequency of strong ENSO events is likely to increase as a result of climate change (
Cai et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2017; Yun et al., 2021 ; IPCC, 2021). Relatively early research (i.e., pre- AR5, 
e.g., Stevenson, 2012  and references therein) already indicated that climate model simulations suggest changes 
in the ocean- atmospheric dynamics related to ENSO and its impacts. More recent research (post AR5, feeding into 
AR6) have contributed substantially to  advancing our understanding of ENSO under climate change. Notably,  
Freund et al. (2020)  suggest that future changes to ENSO depend on both mean state changes and decadal -scale 
natural variability , whereas  Yun et al. (2021) demonstrate an amplification of ENSO -rainfall  variability using the 
CMIP6 ensemble, regardless of the l ack of signal in the amplification of the Sea Surface Temper ature (SST) 
anomalies (Figure B1.1.1, also see IPCC, 2021) . Various other studies contribute evi dence on how ENSO responds 
to global warming. For instance, W ang et al. (2017) demonstrate that the frequency of extreme El Niño events 
increases linearly with increased global mean temperature, doubling at 1.5ºC warming.  Likewise, Cai et al. (2018) 
find a likely increase in the number of ‘strong’ equatorial Pacific El Niño events and associated extreme weather 
events using CMIP5.  Ultimately, while a robust projection of ENSO is not feasible with the current generation of 
climate model s, it is clear that ENSO -related climate variations will continue to challenge agricultural production in 
all regions of Colombia.  Strong ENSO events can severely impair agricultural productivity in Colombia ( Barrios -
Perez et al., 2021 ). 
 
Figure B.1. 1. Changes in amplitude of ENSO variability. Variability of (a) SST and (b) precipitation anomalies averaged 
over Niño3.4 region for 1950- 2014 from CMIP6 historical simulations and for 2015- 2100 from four SSPs.  Each line 
shows the average of all climate models for the historical period or for the SSPs. Shading is the 5- 95% range across 
CMIP6 mo dels. Taken  from IPCC (2021)  (Fig. 4.10; Chapter 4, WGI) .


---
*Page 10*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 8 OF 75 
 
  
 
12. According to Colombia’s Third National Communication  (TNC) under the United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change (UNFCCC), prepared by Colombia’s Institute of Hydrology, Meteorology and Environmental 
Studies (IDEAM), the agricultural sector will be substantially affected by climate change with yields, la nd suitability 
and harvest seasons  all impacted by variations temperature and rainfall (IDEAM, PNUD, MADS, DNP, 
CANCILLERÍA, 2017 ). Several resear ch studies support these findings (e.g., Castro- Llanos et al., 2019; Ramirez -
Villegas et al., 2012 ; Nuñez et al., 2018).  
13. Farmers have limited access to practices and technologies suitable for adapting to climate change.  Hence, farmers 
are vulnerable to large crop losses due to both long- term trends in climate and greater climate variability in weather 
patterns and the urban population faces the prospect of periodic food scarcity and volatile pr ices. Remedying this 
dire situation for the whole country requires provision of technologies that counteract the effects of climate change 
and greater variation in the weather.  Because climatic variations occur at a range of timescales  and these variations 
are all affected by long- term climate change, adaptation needs to be framed accordingly. Adaptation strategies can 
be incremental, systemic, or transformational. Incremental adaptation helps respond to seasonal and interannual 
variations; systemic adaptation helps prepare for changes in the coming decades; and transformational change 
involves planning agricultural transitions when systems are no longer viable ( Ramirez -Villegas and Khoury, 2013 ; 
Rippke et al., 2016 ). 
14. Colombia’s rural population (30.4% of the total population) is highly vulnerable to extreme events.  Forty five percent of the rural population are poor, and their income is largely derived from agriculture ( ECLAC, 2012
). The magnitude 
of the agricultural sec tor’s vulnerability to climatic variation is illustrated by the losses of approximately USD 480 
million during the El Niño event in 1997- 1998 (ECLAC, 1999) and US$ 1 billion due to La Niña of 2010- 11 (ECLAC , 
2012 ). In the 2010- 2011 La Niña, severe rains flooded 3.5 million hectares and affected 3.2 million people, 64.7% 
of whom lived in rural areas. Climate change- driven changes in the freq uency and intensity of droughts, floods, 
rains and storms, and increased temperatures wi ll most likely exacerbate these impacts.  
15. The temperature in Colombia increased by 0.13° C per decade during the 1971- 2000 period according to IDEAM 
(Ruiz, 2010), and i s expected to increase by 3 to 5° C by mid-  21st century (Arnell et al., 2004; IPCC, 2007; IPCC, 
2021 ).  According to the Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) of the IPCC ( IPCC, 2021 ), extreme heat (especially in the 
lowland northern regions) and heavy precipitation events and flooding (across the Pacific and the inter -Andean 
Valleys) are the most important changes in climatic impact drivers for Colombia. Regarding the latter, 
unprecedented flooding events have been reported in recent decades in the lower reaches of the Atrato, Cauca, and Magdalena rivers (IPCC, 2021 –  Chapter 12; 
Avila et al., 2019 ). Extreme precipitation can also drive lands lides, 
with Colombia being considered one of the countries in Latin America with high incidence of fatal landslides. ENSO 
and climat e change are the main causes of these landslides (IPCC, 2021; Sepulveda and Petley, 2015 ). Greater 
confidence exists regarding precipitation dec reases  (IPCC, 2021; https://interactive- atlas.ipcc.ch ), and resulting 
changes in hydrological and agricultural drought. For instance, it is estimated that 62% of the existi ng streamflow 
timeseries across the country exhibit a si gnificant decreasing trend ( Carmona and Poveda, 2014 ; IPCC, 2021). Of 
particular concern are the northern lowlands  (Caribbean region, and lower Cauca), where hydrological and 
agricultural drought affect agricultural production and livelihoods substantially current climates  (https://interactive -
atlas.ipcc.ch ; Perez et al., 2020 ; Contreras, 2019; Castro, 2019 ). More evidence is, however, needed in order to 
assess future projected changes for precipitation- related impact drivers.  
 
Figure B.1. 2. Changes in temperature and precipitation in Colombia, 2071- 2100 vs 1976- 2005, RCP 4.5  (IDEAM, 
PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA, 2017 ). 
Differences in mean annual temperature  
(2071 -2100 vs 1976 -2005)  Differences in mean average annual preci pitation  
(2071 -2100 vs 1976 -2005)


---
*Page 11*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 9 OF 75 
 
   
  
 
16. IDEAM’s climate projections suggest that 26 of the 32 Colombian departments are likely to see large yield losses 
on basic crops associated with food security, such as cassava, rice, plantain, sugarcane, potatoes, maize and 
beans due to these changes unless  remedial action is taken. The current and projected effects of climate change 
on both agricultural and livestock systems are alarming. In livestock, the economic impact of climate change in Colombia shows that the departments that have experienced the greatest reductions in livestock production are 
Nariño (18.5% reduction in production vis -à-vis the 1970-
2010 baseline scenario), Casanare (6,0%), Córdoba 
(5.4%), Caquetá (4.6%), Guaviare (3.6%) and Cundinamarca (3.5%) (DNP, 2014). In the case of maize (FAO -
MADR, 2013), yield losses are projected in the main production regions vis -à-vis the baseline scenario: humid 
Caribbean (25%); Orinoquia (20%); Upper Cauca Basin (11%) and Upper Magdalena (62%). Likewise, yield losses of around 25% are expected in rice prod
uction in Orinoquia, potato yield losses of around 10% will likely be 
experienced in Cundinamarca- Boyacá and around 40% in Nariño. It is estimated that sugarcane production is 
highly vulnerable to changes of over 2°C in temperature and over 3% in precipita tion (Lau et al, 2010). Not only will 
yield be affected, but the timing of agronomic events and crop quality could also change. For example, banana 
phenology, related to quality for the export market, is likely to change with a negative impact on desirable 
characteristics and sugar concentration is likely to be reduced as temperatures rise. Furthermore, flooding, 
waterlogging and increased pest and disease pressure are likely. See Table B.1.1 for a summary of the impacts 
for the value  chains considered in the Project.  It is noteworthy that the body of evidence related to climate change 
impacts on crop production in Colombia is not very substantial. However, it clearly suggests that , even in relatively 
stringent climate mitigation trajectories such as RCP2.6 and RCP4.5, without adaptation actions climate change 
will negatively affect all eight agricultural sub- sectors targeted by C SICAP (see e.g., Ramirez -Villegas et al., 2012; 
Castro- Llanos et al., 2019; Jägermeyr et al., 2021).  
 Table B.1.1. Climate change risks and impacts in the targeted agricultural sub- sectors , and adaptation and mitigation 
interventions and benefits . Information provided is for RCP4.5 unless otherwise specified.  
Sector 
/ value 
chain  Threat / 
Climate risk  Impacts of climate change  Adaptation interventions and benefits  Mitigation 
interventions and 
benefits  
Rice - Low radiation/ low 
yields ; 
- High 
humidity/increased 
diseases  
- Dry 
periods/irrigation 
supply problems  For the dry Caribbean region, a 22% 
reduction in climatic suitability is estimated 
for 2050 at RCP 8.5 ( Castro -Llanos et al.,  
2019 ). For the humid Caribbean region, 
changes in crop phenology are expected by 
2050 for all RCPs  (Ramirez -Villegas et al., 
2012 ). In the central part of the country, an 
80% reduction in climate suitability is 
expected by 2050 with RCP 8.5 ( Castro -
Llanos et al., 2019 ). Impacts are projected Interventions : Big Data platforms using remote and non -
remote sensors and agroclimatic information services 
improved (climate and crops predictions and pest and 
disease alert prediction models) ; New varieties tolerant 
or resistant to drought, water deficit, high temperatures 
and low radiation ( develop, validation, massive 
multiplication and deliver of seed to farmers) .;  Water 
resource planning at the basin level ; Massive 
implementation of agronomic management technologies Interventions : Massive 
implementation of 
agronomic management 
technologies and 
transf ormation processes 
that promote low -carbon 
development  
Benefits : Direct emissions 
reductions 41,016 tCO2e


---
*Page 12*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 10 OF 75 
 
 - High 
temperatures/low 
yields  
 
See: Castro -Llanos 
et al. (2019), 
Ramirez -Villegas et 
al. (2012) , FAO & 
MADR (2013), 
Cortés  & Alarcón 
(2017)  
Jägermeyr et al. 
(2021 ) to be generally less under more stringent 
mitigation scenarios such as RCP2.6 or 
RCP4.5, with less severe yield and/ or 
suitability reductions ( Jägermeyr et al., 
2021 ; Ramirez -Villegas et al., 2012). For the 
eastern plains  region, a 25% reduction in 
yield is estimated for 2030 under RCP 4.5 
(FAO and MADR, 2013; Jägermeyr et al., 
2021 ). In some regions where it is possible 
to take advantage of better climatic 
conditi ons projected for the crop are the 
middle and upper parts of the Magdalena inter-
Andean valley (Cortés & Alarcón, 
2017, FAO and MADR, 2013) and the upper part of the Cauca inter -
Andean valley 
(Castro -Llanos et al., 2019 ). and transformation processes that enable more efficient 
use of water  
Benefits : Increase productivity  (20%) , loss reduction, 
lower costs (8 -13%) and increased profitability resulting 
technologies for agroclimatic risk management and 
digital agriculture adoption, use of genetically improved 
climate resilient varieties and efficient water use 
practices.  
Maize  - Low radiation/ low 
yields  
- High humidity/  
increased diseases  
- Dry periods/  
irrigation supply 
problems  
- High temperatures/  
low yields/increased 
pests  
 
See: FAO and 
MADR (2013) , 
Goavaerts et al 
(2019), CIMMYT and 
CIAT (2019), DNP -
BID (2014). Yield reductions are predicted in the main 
production areas of Colombia. Estimated 
yield reductions to 2030 for the humid Caribbean fluctuate between 12 and 28% 
(
FAO and MADR, 2013 , Govaerts et al., 
2019, CIMMYT & CIAT, 2019; Jägermeyr et 
al., 2021 ). In the inter -Andean valleys, the 
yield reduction to 2030 is estimated to be between 6 and 62% (Goavaerts  et al., 2019, 
CIMMYT & CIAT,2019, 
FAO and MADR, 
2013 ). For the eastern plains region, yield 
reductions to 2030 are estimated to be 
between 1 and 20% (Goavaerts et al., 2019, 
CIMMYT & CIAT,2019, DNP -BID, 2014 ). At 
the local level, in Cereté (Córdoba) a 
decrease in yield of between 13% to 28% is 
expected, in Espinal (Tolima) between 6% 
to 8%, and in Uribe (Meta) from 1% to 3%.  Interventions : Big Data platforms using remote and non -
remote sensors and agroclimatic information services improved (climate and crops predictions and pest and 
disease alert prediction models) ; New varieties toler ant 
or resistant to drought, water deficit, high temperatures and disease resistance ( develop, validation, massive 
multiplication and deliver of seed to farmers) ; Massive 
implementation of agronomic management technologies 
and transformation processes that  enable more efficient 
use of water and promote low -carbon development . 
Benefits : Increase productivity  (10-27%) , loss reduction, 
and increased profitability resulting technologies for agroclimatic risk management and digital agriculture 
adoption, use of genetically improved maize varieties 
and efficient water use practices.  Interventions : Massive 
implementation of 
agronomic management 
technologies and 
transformation processes 
that promote low -carbon 
development . 
Benefits : Direct emissions 
reductions 15,965 tCO2e . 
Cattle  - Waterlogging -rainy 
season/  Forage rot  
- Dry periods/  low 
forage production  
- High temperatures/  
animal stress  
 
(DNP- IDB, 2014 ; 
DNP -BID, 2015 ), 
CIAT and 
CORMACARENA (2018)  For cattle farming, the economic impacts of 
climate change in Colombia show that the 
departments experiencing the greatest 
reductions in cattle production are Nariño 
(18.5% reduction in production when 
compared to the  1970 -2010 baseline 
scenario), Casanare (6.0%), Córdoba 
(5.4%), Caquetá (4.6%), Guaviare (3.6%) 
and Cundinamarca (3.5%) ( DNP -IDB, 2014 , 
DNP -BID, 2015 ). Interventions : Big Data platforms using remote and non -
remote sensors and agroclimatic services (information 
and recommendations) for ranchers ; New forages 
varieties tolerant or resistant to drought, water deficit and 
excess ( develop, validation, massive multiplication and 
deliver of seed to farmers) ; Quantifying the water 
footprint ; Evaluation of efficient water use practices ; 
Massive implementation of agronomic management technologies and transformation processes that enable 
more effi cient use of water . 
Benefits : Increase in 12% in productivity for beef cattle 
and double the yields for dairy farming resulting 
increased profitability from adoption of technologies for 
agroclimatic risk management and digital agriculture 
adoption and efficient water use practices.  Interventions : Landscape 
restoration and technology 
transfer and scaling 
(implementation of 
sustainable livestock 
models: silvo -pastoral 
systems, pasture rotation, 
pasture improvement, living 
fences ); Massive 
implementat ion of 
agronomic management 
technologies and 
transformation processes 
that promote low -carbon 
development ; Quantifying 
the carbon footprint . 
Benefits : Direct emissions 
reductions 208,220 tCO2e  
Panela 
sugarcane - High temperatures/  
increased pest 
infestation  
- Excess of 
water/plant rot  
- Dry periods/low 
yields  
 
Since there are no 
specific studies on 
this crop, the risk 
comes from the 
expert’s  opinion from 
the gremio , 
Agrosavia, Cenicaña 
and CIAT.  This is a crop of great social importance in 
Colombia, as it is the basis for the 
livelihoods of some 160,000 families of smallholder farmers. However, little has 
been studied and there is practically no 
research related to climate.  However, it is 
expected to have similar behavior as 
sugarcane, and m ay experience  gradual 
loss of climate suitability and decrease in yields by 2050 (
Ramirez -Villegas et al., 
2012 ).  Interventions : Big Data platforms using remote and non-
remote sensors and agroclimatic services (information 
and recommendations) for panela sugar cane 
producers . New varieties tolerant or resistant to drought, 
water deficit and high temperatures ( develop, validation, 
massive multiplication and deliver of seed to farmers) ; 
Quantifying the water footprint , water resource planning 
at the basin level , evaluation of efficient water use 
practices ; Massive implementation of agronomic 
management technologies and transformation 
processes that enable more efficient use of water . 
Benefits : Increase productivity  (65%) , loss reduction, 
lower costs (30%) and increased profitability resulting 
technologies for agroclimatic risk management and 
digital agriculture adoption and efficient water use 
practices.  Interventions : Massive 
implementation of 
agronomic management 
technologies and 
transformation processes 
that promote low -carbon 
development ; Quantifying 
the carbon footprint . 
Benefits : Direct emissions 
reductions 78,799 tCO2e . 
Potato  Dry periods/low 
yields 
Excessive 
rainfall/increased 
diseases  
Frosts/crop loss  The areas for this crop are concentrated in 
the high zones of the mountains of the Andean region, and the estimated yield 
reduction to 2030 is estimated at between 
10% and 40% (
DNP- BID, 2014 , FAO and 
MADR, 2013).  DNP -BID (2014) estimates Interventions : Big Data platforms using remote and non -
remote sensors and agroclimatic services (information and recommendations) for potato producers ; New 
varieties tolerant or resistant to drought, water deficit and high temperatures (massive multiplication and deliver of 
seed to farmers) ; Massive implementation of agronomic Interventions : Massive 
implementation of 
agronomic management 
technologies and 
transformation processes 
that promote low -carbon


---
*Page 13*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 11 OF 75 
 
 High 
temperatures/increa
sed pests, 
displacement of 
production 
 
DNP -BID (2014) , 
FAO and MADR 
(2013)  that Nariño and Cundinamarca will have the 
greatest reductions in yields. The drop in yields compared to those simulated in the 
baseline scenario are related to the higher 
expected occurrence of irregular 
precipitation periods (rainfall concentrated 
in sho rt periods and long periods without 
rain) and increases in air temperature that affect various physiological processes of 
the crop. In Cundinamarca, a decrease in 
yields ranging from 5% to 35% when 
compared with those estimated for the 
2000- 2010 period is expected. In addition, 
in the case of Boyacá, there would be a downward trend ranging from 7% to 12% for 
yields between the period 2041 and 2070.  management technologies and transformation 
processes that enable more efficient use of water and promote low -carbon development ( conservation tillage 
models)  
Benefits : Increase productivity  and loss reduction (16-
20%) , lower costs (10%) and increased profi tability 
resulting technologies for agroclimatic risk management 
and digital agriculture adoption and efficient water use 
practices.  development (conservation 
tillage models) . 
Benefits : Direct emissions 
reductions 34,324 tCO2e 
Coffee  Excessive 
rainfall/low yields  
High temperatures/berry 
borer infestation  
 
Ramirez -Villegas et 
al. (2012) , (CIAT -
USAID- FNC, 2017).  Coffee is distributed in the mid -mountain 
zone across the entire mountain geography 
of the Andean region. Here, changes in the 
phenology of the crop are expected by 2050 
(Ramirez -Villegas et al., 2012), a gradual 
loss of climatic suitability and decrease in 
yields by 2050, above 1500 masl (Ramirez -
Villegas et al., 2012), and an intensificat ion 
of problems related to pests and diseases 
(below 1500 masl) by 2050 (Ramirez -
Villegas et al., 2012 ). In a specific  study in 
Colombia’s ‘coffee- growing region’ as it is 
known, it was reported that by 2030, 22% of 
the current suitable coffee -producing area is 
expected to have been lost (CIAT -USAID-
FNC, 2017).  Interventions : Big Data platforms using remote and non -
remote sensors and agroclimatic information services 
improved (climate and crops predictions and pest and disease alert prediction models) ; New varieties tolerant 
or resistant to pest resistance ( massive multiplication 
and deliver of seed to farmers) ; Water reso urce planning 
at the basin level ; Evaluation of efficient water use 
practices . 
Benefits : Increase productivity  (10-15%) , loss reduction, 
lower costs (3 -7%) and increased profitability resulting 
technologies  for agroclimatic risk management and 
digital agriculture adoption.    
Sugarcan
e Waterlogging/crop 
loss 
Dry periods/irrigation 
supply problems  
 
FAO and MADR 
(2013).  
Ramirez -Villegas et 
al., (2012).  Higher temperatures, higher dioxide 
concentration, and higher yields 12.5% 
(FAO and MADR, 2013).  
Gradual loss of climate suitability and 
decrease in yields by 2050 ( Ramirez -
Villegas et al., 2012 ). Interventions : Big Data platforms using remote and non -
remote sensors and agroclimatic information services 
improved (climate and crops predictions and pest and 
disease alert prediction models) ; New sugarcane 
varieties tolerant or resistant to drought, water deficit and excess ( develop, validation, massive multiplication and 
deliver of seed to farmers) ;  
Benefits : Increase productivity  by 20% , loss reduction, 
and increased profitability resulting technologies for 
agroclimatic risk management and digital agriculture 
adopti on and use of genetically improved varieties.   
Musaceae  Dry periods/low yield  
High temperatures/ 
low yields and 
increased pest 
infestation  Banana crop is concentrated in two regions 
of the country, one near the humid 
Caribbean zone and the other near the dry 
Caribbean. Changes in crop phenology are 
expected by 2050, changes in pest and 
disease incidence (below 500 masl) by 
2050 and gradual loss of climatic suitability 
and decrease in yields by 2050, below 500 
masl ( Ramirez -Villegas et al., 2012 ). 
Plantain crop is found throughout much of the national geography and in different 
thermal floors. By 2030, problems are 
expected with high temperatures and 
therefore loss of climatic suitability in the lower parts, especially in the dry humid 
Caribbean and  the Orinoquia (CIAT, 2014).  Interventions : Big Data platforms using remote and non -
remote sensors and agroclimatic services (information 
and recommendations) for banana and plantain 
producers ; New varieties tolerant or resistant to drought, 
water deficit and high temperatures (validation, massive 
multiplication and deliver of seed to farmers) ; 
Quantifying the water footprint ; Water resource planning 
at the basin level ; Evaluation of efficient water use 
practices ; Massive implementation of agronomic  
management technologies and transformation 
processes that enable more efficient use of water . 
Benefits : Increase productivity  (16-22%) , loss reduction, 
lower costs (15%) and increased profitability resulting 
technologies for agroclimatic risk management a nd 
digital agriculture adoption, and efficient water use practices.  Interventions :  Massive 
implementation of 
agronomic management 
technologies and 
transformation processes 
that promote low -carbon 
development .; Quantifying 
the carbon footprint . 
Benefits : Direct emissions 
reductions 53,973 tCO2e . 
Source: Own elaboration.1 IDEAM, 2015  
 
17. Given the extent and scope of climate change impacts, actions are needed that put climate- smart varieties, 
agricultural technologies, practices, and information services in the hands of farmers so that they are better 
prepared to respond to existing  and ne w climate- related stresses. These technologies will help farmers cope with 
climatic variability and extremes (both which are projected to change under climate change, Fowler et al., 2021; 
Kharin et al., 2018), and continue with their agricultural activities in the shifted temperature and rainfall regimes 
expected in the coming decades. Likewise, greater knowledge production, management and exchange is needed 
to strengthen agricultural extension services, improve institutional capacities, and farmers’ knowle dge and ability 
to implement climate -smart technologies.


---
*Page 14*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 12 OF 75 
 
 18. The country currently lacks appropriate agro -climatic advisory services, and an agricultural research and extension 
system that can provide producers with time and site- specific information on how to respond to climate variability 
and climate change. Furthermore, agricultural technology development in Colombia has been based on the top-
down linear model largely directed to increasing yield under favorable weather conditions, whenc e producers have 
few technological options to meet the challenges of more variable and often adverse weather conditions. 
Furthermore, there is only limited institutional capacity to develop technology specifically designed for current and 
future adverse we ather conditions, emphasizing the need to build institutional capacity to not only develop resilient 
agricultural technology but also to ensure that farmers have access to and confidence in novel, robust farming techniques. Within this context Colombia has  not embraced the widely accepted move towards innovation systems 
and continuous to follow the outmoded pattern of research followed by validation and then extension.  
19. Context – Adaptation and mitigation needs  
20. Adaptation needs. The most relevant impacts of climate variability and change in the agricultural sector in Colombia 
include: i) losses in livestock, both in terms of the number of animals and productivity; ii) losses in crop yields; iii) 
reduced crop resilience to external shocks linked to changes in climatic variables; iv) reduced water availability; v) 
increased soil erosion; vi) reduced topsoil moisture; vii) increased incidence of pests and diseases; viii) increased 
occurrence of unexpected fires; ix) reduced number of growing cycles; x) decreased food and nutritional security.  
21. Irrigation provides only 10% of the water requirement for permanent and transitory crops and the remaining 90% is 
provided by rainwater. This increases the vulnerability of the sector, considering the changes in precipitation  
regimes due to climate change (MADR -PIGCCS, 2020). The irrigation requirement is higher in sugarcane, palm 
and bananas , which represent 55% of irrigation water in agriculture. For its part, the irrigation requirement of 
temporary crops is concentrated in irrigated rice cultivation, which represents approximately 13% of irrigation water in agriculture.  
22. Mitigation needs . According to the TCN, the agricultural sector is the second most important source of greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions in Colombia, contributi ng 30% of total emissions . Emission sources in the agricultural sector 
include enteric fermentation produced by livestock, manure handling, rice cultivation, prescribed burning in 
savannas, field burning of agricultural residue and agricultural soils as a source of nitrogen as part of various 
agricultural practices (applying synthetic fertilizers, adding manure and agricultural residues to the soil as fertilizers, 
nitrogen- fixing crops, and mineralization of soil organic nitrogen). In this sense, it is necessary to improve practices 
in both livestock and agricultural production to reduce GHG emissions. In the case of rice, there is no information on the emission levels associated with different crop technologies, and low carbon technologies have not been identified and quantified. There is no mitigation plan or strategy for this crop at the aggregate level, despite being 
one of the most emitting crops. For other crops, there is no certainty about low -carbon technologies that can be 
scaled- up to the region. In the case of livestock, a large area and numerous regions and livestock systems must 
be covered, which makes it challenging to scale- up this technological approach.  
23. With technical support from MADS and DNP, MADR carried out a technical exercise to identify  and prioritize 
mitigation measures for the agricultural, forestry and land- use change sectors, considering the following criteria: i) 
Expected increase or decrease of the area used in 2018 for agricultural production systems, Colombia Siembra  
program; ii) Representative nature of agricultural activities in the national territory (area); iii) Reference of NAMA 
structured documents; iv) Potential for reduction based on information (Uniandes 2015 sheets, MADR CIAT 2012-2015 agreements); v) Techni cal meetings to coordinate the AFOLU sector. The GHG emission reduction measures 
identified in 2017, as well as the cost of implementing these measures up to 2030, which amounts to USD 4,884.6 
million.  It is estimated that implementing these measures woul d reduce GHG emissions by 16,180 Gg CO2eq.  
24. Project definition and justification.  In order to respond to the negative impacts of climate variability and climate  
change in  Colombia’s agricultural sector and to contribute to the fulfillment of national goals  and objectives in 
promoting low -emission and climate- resilient agricultural development, the MADR, with support from CAF, the 
Bioversity International and CIAT Alliance, AGROSAVIA, gremios  working with livestock and rice, maize, potato, 
panela sugarcane, sugarcane, coffee, banana and plantain crops, prioritized the formulation of the CSICAP Project, 
which covers and adequately reflects the needs and requirements in terms of technology, knowledge and 
information for the crops prioritized in the Project’s fr amework and scope.  
25. In a scenario without the Project and the proposed interventions, the previously described problems affecting the agricultural sector would persist or further deteriorate. This would lead to limited investment in innovative proposals 
such as using digital media to disseminate climate information. Similarly, there would be limitations in investments 
to develop climate- resilient or low GHG emitting varieties, since there would be limited knowledge of the water 
footprint and water -efficient technologies, and on the carbon footprint of agricultural production chains.  
26. The CSICAP Project is a national initiative aimed at developing, validate, replicate and scal ing-up low carbon and 
climate  resilient  practices and lessons learned from the national government’s efforts in the pilot project and other 
initiatives to mainstream Climate- Smart Agriculture and Livestock Farming as a transformational approach and 
promote actions that contribute to low -emission , resilient agriculture and livestock production. Additionally, the 
Project seeks to create institutional, technical and governance capacities that enable the effective adoption of low 
carbon and climate resilient practices and technologies which  integrate  climate information in decision -making


---
*Page 15*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 13 OF 75 
 
  
3 In the case of rice and maize,  the aim is to scale technologies that were previously evaluated in the pilot and were found to perform well. 
For example, the MIRI system for low water consumption in rice; Cenicaña developments in the efficient use of water, Augura development 
in bio- pesticides and efficient use of fertilizers; Fedepanela with more efficient burner systems and fertilizer use; Fedegan, CIPAV, A grosavia 
and the CIAT - Bioversity Alliance with sustainable livestock systems model; Cenicafé with systems for the efficient use of  fertilizers and 
harvesting, treatment and use of water in agroforestry models; in potatoes with minimum tillage and conservation agriculture developed by 
the CIAT Bioversity Alliance..  processes and innovate in more sustainable production models that are adapted to the country’s different economic, 
social and environmental aspects. The CSICAP Project also seeks to address the different barriers tha t have 
prevented scaling- up resilient and low -emission activities in the agricultural sector, by implementing knowledge 
management strategies, different technology transfer approaches and producer association’s extension services, 
thereby strengthening the enabling factors required for its implementation.  
27. Finally, the CSICAP Project  is aligned with nationally -set priorities to strengthen the role of the agricultural sector. 
It is also in line with GCF’s investment criteria to generate transformational impac ts in development models that 
contribute to a stronger adaptation capacity regarding current and future climate variability and climate change 
risks, while also contributing to a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions.  
28. Objective of the Project . The overall objective of the project is to reduce the agricultural production’s vulnerability 
to climate hazards to minimize their impacts on the sector’s competitiveness and ensure sufficient and stable 
availability of quality food by strengthening climate risk manag ement, while reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 
The following are the specific objectives of the CSICAP Project:  
• Modernize the agricultural extension system to be climate responsive through the implementation and use of 
digital agriculture systems and climate services to provide recommendations on adaptation and mitigation 
measures. This will include providing direct technical support to approximately 123,389 producers and indirect 
support to 104,000  users, who will receive recommendations through the climatic services platforms and 15 
Agroclimatic Technical Working Groups  to reduce crop losses.  
• Develop, validate,  and implement at least 30 new low-emission and resilient technologies and scale -up 70 
existing technologies (genetic improvement, crop management techniques and other technological options)3 
in 131,710 hectares, to increase resilience and promote low -carbon agricultural development by reducing 
432,297 tons of CO 2e in 8,750 hectares . 
• Strengthen capacities and improved business models on climate resilien ce and low -carbon technologies in at 
least 60 entities of the agricultural sector (including Departmental and Municipal Agriculture Secretariats) 
covering 4,400 techn icians and reinforce training among 54,000 agricultural producers for low-carbon and 
resilient agriculture considering environmental, social and gender aspects, to ensure adequate technological 
adoption.  
29. Scope . The CSICAP Project is national in scope,  and it considers livestock and eight  crops: rice, maize, potato, 
sugarcane, panela sugarcane, coffee, and musaceae (banana and plantain).  CSICAP will be implemented in 22 
departments and 219 municipalities, directly benefiting 619,691 people, of which there are more than 194,871  
producers from differen t livestock and producers’ associations and their families ( 424,820  people) and reducing or 
avoiding emissions amounting to 9.15 million tCO 2e during the project lifespan.  
 
Figure B.1.2. Map of prioritized municipalities where direct actions will be carried out as part of the CSICAP Project


---
*Page 16*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 14 OF 75 
 
  
 
30. Related interventions and shortcomings to be addressed. MADR, Agrosavia, and the producer associations 
(to a greater or lesser extent, depending on each sector) are the main actors in the development and validation of 
agricultural technologies and practices. Colombia's MADR has focused its climate -smart agriculture (CSA) efforts 
on new agricultural technology developments, agro- climatic forecasting and related advisory services, site- specific 
or precision agriculture approaches, and low -carbon agricultural practices.  These are aligned with sustainable 
intensification at the farm level and include efficient use of natural resources . Similarly, MADR considers low-
emissions and climate resilient interventions at the landscape level (e.g. , management of farm and forest 
boundaries), services (in particular information and finance services), institutions (particularly market governance, 
incentives for adoption) and food systems (especially consumption patterns and broader climate- informed saf ety 
nets) . In this sense, MADR developed a pilot experience to work on alternatives to reduce crop losses due to 
climatic factors.  MADR signed a Technical and Scientific Cooperation agreement with the International Center for 
Tropical Agriculture ( CIAT ) at the end of 2012, to improve the agricultural sector’s competitiveness, by increasing 
investment in climate -related research, technological development and innovation. This scientific alliance made it 
possible to join efforts, resources and institutional capacities to strengthen the agricultural sector’s capacity to adapt to climate variability and climate change and improve resource efficiency in some regions’ productive systems. One 
of the main results of this agreement was the joint work carried out bet ween the national government, academia, 
research centers, NGOs and producer associations in the productive chains.  
31. The pilot project included four components: (a) agroclimatic risk management, (b) site- specific agriculture, (c) 
testing new technologies  for adaptation, and (d) evaluating sustainable production systems. Fedearroz and Fenalce 
engaged in work involving three crops: rice, maize and bean. During the pilot phase, progress  was made in 
developing and validating climate forecast models for some of the prioritized areas , and an initial analyses 
on Site- Specific Agriculture. Advanced waterlogging-  and drought -tolerant lines were evaluated, and the water 
footprint was measured f or different production systems, including rice. The producer associations (Fedearroz and 
Fenalce) consider that the information and tools created during two years’ worth of work were valuable and hold 
great potential. Similarly, a capacity- building proces s to benefit producer associations’ technicians  was 
initiated, and information on certain specific issues was delivered directly to the producers. The pilot project also 
included other elements, such as measuring the carbon footprint in palm, Intensive Sil vopastoral Systems and 
Fruit Trees; measurements were made to determine soil loss and water footprint in potatoes, and cassava 
materials were evaluated.  Annex 23 provides a detailed analysis of the result of the pilot activities.  
32. The results of the pilot evidenced a great potential , but also gaps,  for adapting the agricultural sector to climate 
change. Some of those gaps  for up- scaling and replication include  knowledge and resources (human, 
technological, etc.) to develop the necessary tools and inst ruments to reach local producers with recommendations  
of climate resilient and low -carbon technologies . As later discussed in section B.3, there are still several gaps in 
data collection and digital tools , limited use of digital media to disseminate climate information coverage of climate 
services, limited capacity by the gremios to develop climate resilient genetic resources , and gaps in extension 
services. For example, m ost of the gremios  are highly dependent on t he technological developments that are 
carried out in research centers, and it is unlikely that the latter will generate the technology needed for all crops and


---
*Page 17*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 15 OF 75 
 
  
4 From the experience with Fenalce and Fedearroz , the development, dis semination and use of site -specific climate information and data 
platforms has some constraints and challenges, including digitalization of existing data, organization of different databases and formats, and 
the collection of missing data (e.g. soils  for Fenalce). For the use of data, t raining is required for technicians and farmers to understand the 
information provided by the tool, which requires time to achieve confidence especially for the gremios’ technicians, since the farmers  have a 
high degree of confidence on them. A limitation that remains is coverage, since each technician is able to visit and collect information from a 
limited number of farms ( approx.  100), and the use of all remote and non- remote instrumentation would substantially expand the coverage.  under different environmental conditions. In the best of cases, generic technologies are develo ped that are 
applicable in certain contexts.   The CSICAP project seeks to address th ose gaps , expand activities to other 
crops not included in the original pilot (e.g. coffee, sugarcane, panela sugarcane, and musaceaes ) and expand 
its geographic coverage to a greater number of municipalities and farmers  (Figure B.1.2) . It is worth noting 
that m ost of the gremios work on the promotion of technologies and, depending on the gremio , they develop 
technologies related to various agronomic and product processing issues. As mentioned earlier, m ost of the 
gremios do not have the capacity to develop the tools and instruments that will be developed with  the project, but 
have the capacity to implement them and to continue with the work after their development. In some cases , the 
gremios have the technical capacity to achieve some of the outputs, but not all, and the fe w that can do it, do not 
do it due to budget constraints. That is, what the project would achieve in 5 years for the strongest gremios  (coffee, 
rice, bananas) , it may take more than 20 years to achieve it  by themselves . Once these tools are developed, and 
the gremios appropriate them, it is expected, as it occurred with the pilot, that it will have a positive impact on 
farmers , and that the gremios will continue and expand their operation and application.  
33. Progress and basic investment. On the other hand, the CSICAP project complements  several agricultural and 
climate -change interventions that have been developed in Colombia, besides the pilot mentioned above. These 
include:  
• The Sustainable Bovine Livestock NAMA  with the participation of the Colombian Livestock Federation 
(FEDEGAN), the Center for Research on Sustainable Agricultural Production Systems (CIPAV), CIAT 
(LivestockPlus), MADR and MADS. T he total project amount is USD 8.2 million, of which USD 5.8 million is  
private investment, USD 1.6 million are national public resources and USD 0.8 million international funds.  
• The GEF project for the initial implementation of the NAMA for the Panela subsector  (USD 2 million) , which 
includes the p articipation of Fedepanela, CAF, the Financing Fund for the Agricultural Sector (FINAGRO), MADR 
and MADS.  
• The CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security ( CCAFS ) and the International 
Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) have worked on various initiatives regarding climate change and the 
agricultural sector  in Colombia. CIAT -CCAFS led the creation of six Agroclimatic Technical Working Groups 
(MTA) and carried out critical scientific research that enabled widespread and sustained use of site- specific 
agroclimatic forecasts. Research results included agronomic practice manuals to support agronomic forecasts 
and training in the collection and use of site- specific data. Through the MTAs, local and national governments, 
producer associations such as the National Federation of Cereal, Legume and Soy Growers (Fenalce), the 
National Federation of Rice Growers (Fedearroz), the National Federation of  Coffee Growers (FNC) and 
Cenicaña, and other participating institutions such as Agrosavia and universities, have institutionalized CIAT -
CCAFS’ climate information in their decision- making processes. CIAT -CCAFS' scientific work and capacity 
building in crop modeling and seasonal climate projections allowed national partners, particularly Fedearroz and 
Fenalce, to analyze local conditions and produce and disseminate seasonal agro- climatic forecasts in maize and 
rice-producing regions.4 CIAT -CCAFS scientists assessed the information needs in Santander, Córdoba, Tolima, 
Valle del Cauca, and Meta, thereby enabling the provision of tailored services for users and identifying and inviting participants to MTAs. For example, joint work with Fedearroz has enabled determining 
suitable areas for rice 
production under climate change  in the five rice- growing areas: Bajo Cauca, Centro, Llanos Orientales, 
Santanderes and Costa Norte. These studies determined that the geographic valleys of the Cauca and Patía rivers will be more suitable in the future than the Magdalena R iver valley (Huila and Tolima) is today, as its 
suitability will be slightly  reduced. These analyzes have been used to determine climate-
change adaptation 
strategies for rice crops.  
• Other GCF projects may complement geographically the project activities, such as the Amazon Bioeconomy Fund ( FP173
) which focuses on coffee value chains in the Amazon basin, an area not covered by the proposed 
project. For the project on “ Scaling up climate resilient water management practices for vulnerable communities 
in La Mojana” (FP056 ), both projects will be working in a common municipality (San Marcos, Sucre), where they 
will complement each other  as the proposed project will work on mitigation (measurement of GHG in rice), while 
FP056 is working on adaptation. Although working in different regions, both projects work on agroclimatic 
information and can interact to share and strengthen knowledge between them . 
 
B.2. Theory of change (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages  plus diagram )


---
*Page 18*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 16 OF 75 
 
 34. Aware of the economic, social, and environmental challenges associated with the impacts of climate change in the 
Colombian agricultural sector, the Government of Colombia, producer associations and other key actors within the 
agricultural sector are increasingly looking for effective ways to promote a more sustainable, inclusive and resilient 
development  pathway . Substantial efforts are needed to ensure systematic and structural change, and this 
transition faces barriers that are diverse and intertwined. While this approach may not respond to other financial 
and governance challenges that are also relevant to the sustainable and inclusive development of the agricultural 
sector, the theory of change proposes that Program activities will be sufficient to produce the expected results and 
impacts to achieve a paradigm shift towards a low -carbon, climate- resilient development trajectory.  The Theory of 
Change is outline in Figure B.2.1 and described in detail in the following paragraphs.  
35. Project Goal . The overall long- term goal of the CS ICAP project is to reduce the vulnerability of agricultural 
production and the most vulnerable segments of the rural population, especially women, to the threats of variable weather and climate change. At the same time, a national goal is to reduce GHG emis sions from agricultural 
activities. As part of that goal, the project seeks that farmers and those engaged in agriculture to have better information, site and time specific, on currently available technologies suitable for their particular climate needs. 
This would enable farmers to better manage their crops because they would be able to tailor their crop management 
to their particular farm conditions, including changes in climate variability and climate change. If novel technological 
solutions to combat cl imate variation and climate change were to be developed and then shown to be effective, 
then farmers would adopt these technological solutions and become less vulnerable, while using less resources. If 
growers and extension agents were able to access infor mation and share experiences on how best to manage 
crops for specific sites in both space and time, then farmers would manage their  crops better, leading to more 
stable production. If farmers were aware of the GHG emissions associated with distinct managem ent of their farms 
and they perceived benefits from reduced emissions they would likely adopt these systems and GHG emissions 
would be reduced.  
36. Goal Statement: IF  farmers in Colombia’s agricultural sector adopt climate- resilient and low -carbon practices , 
THEN  they will be able to improve their well -being while increasing their resilience and adaptability to climatic 
threats while reducing the agricul tural sector´s GHG emissions , BECAUSE  farming systems with improved 
competitiveness will be able to provide and sufficient and stable availability of quality food, by strengthening climate 
risk management while expanding sustainable management of farmland and natural resources.  
37. Outcomes . To reach the overall project goal, there are four  expected project outcomes: i) The targeted productive 
agricultural value chains have greater strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks ; ii) 
Increased generation and use of climate information in decision -making; iii) Improvement in the well -being of 
producer families and socio -environmental sustainability of Colombian agriculture; and iv) Improved management 
of land in agricultural areas contributing to GHG emissions reductions.  Each of these outcomes is aligned with GCF 
results areas and Fund Level impacts as outlined in Section E. More specifically, outcomes  (i) and (ii)  are aligned 
with the “increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communiti es and regions”; 
outcome (ii i) is aligned with the “increased resilience of health and well -being, and food and water security”; and 
outcome ( iv) is aligned with the “reduced emissions from land use, reforestation, reduced deforestation, and through 
sustainable forest management and conservation and enhancement of forest carbon stocks”.  It is also worth noting 
that there is causal relationship between outcomes, where the i ncreased generation and use of climate information 
in decision- making  (Outcome 2) could lead to greater strengthened adaptive capacity  of the targeted value chains 
(Outcome 1). At the same time, the greater adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks of the targeted 
value chains (Outcome 1), the i ncreased generation and us e of climate information in decision- making  (Outcome 
2), and the i mproved management of land in agricultural areas (Outcome 4) could lead to the i mprovement in the 
well-being of producer families and socio- environmental sustainability of Colombian agriculture (Outcome 3).  
38. Results.  The project outcomes are sustained by a series of project  results. Specifically, under Component 1 , a 
strengthened and modernized agricultural extension system oriented towards adaptation and mitigation ( Result  
1.1, with the support of Results  3.1 and 3.2) will result in the a doption by farmers and farmer associations of digital 
agriculture for improved decision making for climate change adaptation and mitigation in the targeted value chains , 
resulting in greater climate resilience and adaptability to extreme weather events and climate change (Outcome 1). 
The establishment and/or strengthening of agroclimatic services in the selected value chains ( Result  1.2, with the 
support of Result s 3.1 and 3.2) will result in increased generation and use of climate information in decision- making 
by farmers and farmer associations (Outcome 2), the greater resilience of the targeted agricultural value chains 
(Outcome 1) and the improvement in the well -being of producer families (Outcome 3) . Under Component 2 , the 
strengthened germplasm bank, development of new varieties and massive seed distribution ( Result 2.1, with the 
support of Re sults 1.1, 3.1, and 3.2), would result in the adoption by farmers and farmer associations of new climate 
smart practices, technologies and varieties  that will support Outcomes 1, 3 and 4. With site specific c rop 
management techniques and other technological options  validated (Result  2.2, with the support of Result s 1.1, 3.1, 
and 3.2), the project will result in m ore efficient use of water resources, restoration of soil properties, and improving 
GHG mitigation practices  by farmers and farmer associations  for improved management of land in agricultural areas 
contributing to GHG emissions reductions (Outcome 4 ). Under Component 3 , improved business models that


---
*Page 19*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 17 OF 75 
 
 provide farmers with reasonable profits and help them adopt climate mitigation actions ( Result  3.1) will contribute 
to Outcomes 1, 2, 3 and 4. The modernized technical assistance and agricultural extension services with  multi-tool 
strategies, differentiated and adapted to specific environmental, social, gender and productive contexts  (Result  3.2) 
will result in strengthened institutional capacity through trained producers, technicians and producers associations  
with the information to improve management and adopt climate mitigation practices and technologies , contributing 
to Outcomes 1, 2, 3 and 4.  
 
Figure B.2.1. Theory of change of the CSICAP Project 
 
 
 
39. Gaps and barriers. Based on the expected project outcomes , and results, the project, through its activities, 
addresses barriers that at the moment lead the agricultural sector of Colombia towards a development path that is 
not sustainable . The project seeks to change production practices and technologies  in the Colombian agricultural Limited knowledge of water 
footprint and water use 
efficient technologies to 
promote behavioral changes 
that contribute to a better 
use of water resources, 
particularly under stress 
conditionsActivities                                                                                          Results Outcomes               Barriers Goal Statement               Paradigm ShiftIF farmers in Colombia’s agricultural sector adopt climate -resilient and low -carbon practices, THEN they will be able to improve their well -being while increasing their resilience to 
climatic threats and adaptability while reducing the agricultural sector’s GHG emissions, BECAUSE farming systems with improved competitiveness will be able to provide sufficient and 
stable availability of quality food, by strengthening climate risk management while expanding sustainable management of farml and and natural resources.
1.1.1. Organize the information from 
the different repositories and 
producer association databases to 
connect them with updated 
information available. 
1.1.2. Develop a bot -based digital 
instrument to strengthen the 
extension service.
1.1.3. Design and develop the entire 
data mining and analysis operating 
system that will allow 
interconnecting all available 
information.
1.1.4. Train technicians in the use 
and application of advanced data 
analysis methods. 1.2.1. Design and/or strengthen agroclimatic 
information services.
1.2.2. Develop more accurate and precise 
climate and weather prediction models and 
complementary improved crop simulation 
models.
1.2.3. Connect agroclimatic forecasts with 
artificial intelligence models
1.2.4. Strengthen mechanisms to disseminate 
agroclimatic information and transfer 
capacities. 
1.2.5. Other activities related to producing, 
transferring or using agroclimatic information 
(automation of meteorological information, 
analysis of climate change signals, nutrient 
balance models).
•Farmers remain interested and actively participate in project activities; adopt technological packages and best management pr actices.
•Key stakeholders such as farmer associations and government or quasi public sector organizations are effectively engaged, sup port the initiative and are willing to accept and adopt more pluralistic, 
participative and inclusive, less top -down, approaches.
•Technicians participate in the training activities, and develop activities where they can share their knowledge.
•Trainings and farmer -to-farmer exchanges are effective/sufficient to enable and speed up the adoption of low carbon climate -resilient agriculture practices.
•Agro -climatic information generated is received effectively by farmers, which maintains farmers’ interest in actively participat ing in the project. Farmers attend the trainings and know how to use the 
information.
•The capacities created in the farmer associations are maintained and renewed periodically and catalyze a better management of climate risks.
•The technologies, tools, strategies are available and respond to the needs of the sector. The information is disseminated and the organizations / institutions are able to access it.
•Field activities for variety development are not delayed.3.2. Modernized technical 
assistance and agricultural 
extension services with multi -tool 
strategies, differentiated and 
adapted to specific environmental, 
social, gender and productive 
contexts at the national level1.1  Strengthened and 
modernized agricultural 
extension system with an 
emphasis on adaptation and 
mitigation1.2. Agroclimatic services in place and / 
or strengthened2.1. Strengthened 
germplasm bank, new 
climate resilient varieties 
developed and their seeds 
massively distributed2.2. Site specific crop 
management techniques 
and water efficient and low 
carbon technological 
options validated 1. Productive agricultural value 
chains with strengthened 
adaptive capacity and reduced 
exposure to climate risks3. Improvement in the well -being of 
producer families (men and women)  
and socio -environmental sustainability 
of Colombian agriculture4. Improved management 
of land in agricultural areas 
contributing to GHG 
emissions reductionsAssumptionsLimited capacities of agricultural 
extension programmes and local 
farmers to collect, manage and 
systematize data to generate site 
and time specific advice for good 
management practices under 
climatic conditions induced by 
climate variability and changeLimited 
knowledge and ability to 
properly use agroclimatic 
information in local farmers’ 
decision -making processes
to respond timely to climate 
risks and hazards induced by 
climate variability and changeLimited access to 
and knowledge of 
genetic resources 
and their tolerance 
to climate variability 
and change by local 
farmers and 
producersWeak extension services based on linear 
model that  provides blanket 
recommendations rather than site and time 
specific guidelines. Limited technical and 
institutional capacities to adopt and scale 
up climate smart technologies in agricultural 
production. Farmers experiences and 
knowledge not shared, and power of 
farmers groups not effectively utilized. 
Limited knowledge of contributing factors to climate smart agricultural 
technologies uses and adoption by farmers in the targeted value chainsRisksLimited access to productive factors and participation in labor and decision -making processes by 
women and young farmers, which reduces their production potential in agricultural value chains
•Farmers and ranchers tends to be very conservative when adapting to new technologies, varieties or crops, which delays adopti on of new potentially profitable and beneficial production practices.
•Vulnerable groups (women, young farmers, small farmers, ethnic groups) might face social and economic constraints which hinde r their fully participation in project activities and adoption of new 
technologies.
•Possible incorrect design or management of field trials and activities (which might raise environmental risks), or failures i n partnership agreements or institutional settings. 
•Delay in planned scheduled works, including the acquisition of inputs, human resources, materials and tools. 
•Potential issues regarding local governance or mechanisms that may limit the sustainability of the project.
•The project will carry out activities in remote areas with difficult access, which represents a risk for the execution of the project in terms of delays and costs.
•Potential issues related to use of site and time specific information and internet connectivity and coverage, especially in r emo te areas with low connectivity.Transversal Activities /  Results
Limited knowledge of 
carbon footprint at crop 
and technology level to 
promote a large -scale 
adoption of low -
emissions practices
Limited adoption of good environmental and 
social practices to reduce associated risksWeak/vulnerable 
business models, lack 
of tailored financial 
instruments and 
limited technical 
capacities and 
strategic knowledge 
transfer3.1.1. Strengthen gremios 
capacities to use digitally 
enabled tools
3.1.2. Implement 
inclusive climate -resilient 
and low -carbon business 
models
3.1.3. Enhance financial 
sector engagement with 
farmers and their needs 
3.1.4. Fostering agri -
digital entrepreneurship 
ecosystems3.1. Improved business 
models that provide 
farmers with 
reasonable profits and 
improved GHG 
mitigation practices
3.2.1. Promotion of dialogue between 
local knowledge and practices and the 
project concepts, as well as guidelines 
and a communications plan for the 
collective construction and 
appropriation of knowledge -
socialization
3.2.2. Strengthening the capacities of 
beneficiaries, especially women and 
young farmers, regarding climate 
resilience, chain analysis and business 
models
3.2.3. Updating and implementation of 
gender -sensitive technology transfer 
strategies and extension services
3.2.4. Develop a strategy for the 
dissemination, access and use of project 
results2.1.1. Develop a state -of-the-art 
phenotyping platform designed 
to identify low carbon production 
and climate -resistant genetic 
resources.
2.1.2. Identification of heat, 
drought and excess water 
tolerance and incorporation of 
these traits into advanced lines.
2.1.3. Develop new varieties from 
advanced lines for climate 
change adaptation and 
mitigation.
2.1.4. Mass seed multiplication 
(clones) for distribution to 
farmers.2.2.1. Quantifying the baseline 
water footprint
2.2.2. Quantifying the baseline 
carbon footprint
2.2.3. Hydrological modeling of 
basins to identify water 
harvesting points in crop 
production systems
2.2.4. Evaluation of efficient 
water use practices in 
agronomic management and 
transformation processes
2.2.5. Evaluation of GHG 
emission mitigation practices in 
agronomic management and 
transformation processes
Transversal Barriers (gender, environment, impact evaluation)2. Increased generation 
and use of climate 
information in decision -
making


---
*Page 20*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 18 OF 75 
 
 sector towards a sustainable use of resources (water, soil, agricultural inputs, etc.), while developing and 
implementing management practices of cultivation and agricultural technologies that increase resilience to climate 
change ( e.g., droughts and floods). In the context of the adaptation and mitigation needs presented in section B.1, 
the barriers that will be addressed by the project and that will allow the change in the development trajectory of the 
Colombian agricultural  sector are:  
40. i) Limited capacit ies of agricultural extension services and local farmers to collect, manage and systematize data 
to generate site and time specific advice for good management practices under climatic conditions induced by 
climate variability and change. There is limited  basic information or analytical capacity, and the deficient technical 
assistance system prevents the expansion of this type of program. Information and data collection and analysis is 
required to generate a site- specific agricultural platform for certain crops. Currently there is a follow -up and 
monitoring of manual cultivation, depending mainly on the face- to-face assistance of technicians or the producers 
themselves, where there are difficulties in making climate- smart decisions with precision, site- specific and on time. 
There is limited capacity in the recording and management of information for climate- smart decision making, where 
there are gaps in the capture, analysis and dissemination of information. At the sam e time, there is reduced 
coverage of technical assistance, with little use of digital media to disseminate climate information, and a lack of capacity in digital agriculture and data analysis with machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI). There is 
a lack of resources in the producer groups to promote training programs for technicians and producers, especially in the use of tools in data analysis.  
41. ii) Limited knowledge and ability to properly use agroclimatic information for local decision -maki ng’s processes to 
respond timely to climate risks and hazards induced by climate variability and change. Currently, there are gaps in 
meteorological monitoring and the climate predictions that are generated are little contextualized and are not local in scale. At the same time, the agroclimatic models have not been properly developed, where there is a lack of 
basic information, calibration or evaluation; the climate- production system relationship, the variables and critical 
moments within the crop cycle are not well understood. The application and use of agroclimatic information 
projections are limited by th e lack of capacity in agricultural advisory services and inefficient dissemination 
mechanisms to include new regions within the existing platform (corn, coffee, potatoes), the lack of characterization 
of climatic threats (potato, livestock), the lack of resources to calibrate crop models with agroclimatic projections 
and / or the lack of knowledge to calibrate said models ( rice, corn, sugar cane).  
42. iii) Limited access to and knowledge of genetic resources and their tolerance to climate variability  and change by 
local farmers and producers . There is limited knowledge on direct measures for the development of hybrids and 
varieties adapted, evaluated and selected to tolerate extreme climatic conditions of drought and waterlogging, as well as diseases. In the cas e of forage species in livestock, there is low biomass productivity due to phenomena  
associated with climate variability such as droughts and floods. At the same time, there is little or no availability of 
improved seeds to increase adaptation to climate c hange and a need to expand the production capacity and supply 
of planting material.  
43. iv) Limited knowledge of water footprint and water use efficient technologies  to promote behavioral changes that 
contribute to a better use of water resources, particularly  under stress conditions . There is no information on the 
water footprint of the different technologies and, therefore, there is no certainty about the technologies with the 
lowest water footprint that can be applied in the different regions. There are some technologies and information for 
less water use, but there is no scaling- up strategy for these technologies.  
44. v) Limited knowledge of carbon footprint at crop and technology level  to promote a large- scale adoption of low -
emission practices . There is no information on the emission levels associated with different crop technologies, the 
variations in greenhouse gas emissions due to genetics are not known, and low carbon technologies have not been  
identified and quantified. There is no mitigation plan or strategy at the crop level. There is a lack of information and 
dissemination on low -carbon technologies at the commercial level and with strong scientific support on the 
mitigation pot ential. The costs of this type of analysis are high and there is no budget to carry out this type of 
studies . Likewise, farmer groups have limitations to carry out this type of study on their own.  
45. vi) Weak/vulnerable business models  and lack of tailored fi nancial instruments . As climate change and variability 
increase the risk for investing in the agricultural sector, key actors of the agricultural sector (farmers, gremios’ 
technicians, and other sector entities) have limited technical capacities and dealig nment with the digital age to both 
transfer and understanding relevant knowledge to reduce climate risks across their business models. Many of the 
business models of the farmers do not include elements necessary to scale up to profitable, climate resilient  low 
carbon production systems that are well integrated with wholesale and retail markets, with special attention given 
to product differentiation that are climate friendly. Farmers are poorly linked with other actores in the value chain to 
mitigate climat e change and reduce GHG emissions. Moreover, agricultural sector stakeholders lack of tailored 
financial instruments and products that can support de- risking strategies, which is often due to the lack of 
knowledge, information, and active involvement of financial institutions regarding the efforts made by agricultural 
sector stakeholders for a climate- resilient and low -carbon agricultural production system.  A further impediment to 
innovation is that the first mover takes the risk of failure, but if he succeeds the knowledge produced is a public 
good. Hence, it is fair for public or quasi -public funds to be used to underwrite risk taken with novel technologies.


---
*Page 21*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 19 OF 75 
 
 This is particularly necessary with the adoption of GHG reducing technology that produces a public good and may 
not produce any benef it for the initial adopter.   
46. vii) Weak extension services based on linear model that provides blanket recommendations rather than site and 
time specific guidelines . Gremios that are a striking feature of the major crops in Colombian agriculture were all 
formed long before the digital age. They and the agencies that provide services to the growers have mostly 
remained with highly centralized structures that pay relatively little attention to variation over space and time of the 
industries they support. Thus , famers frequently receive blanket recommendations for their crops from the extension 
services and often have a minimal say in the overall strategies and management of the powerful growers’ 
associations that represent them. In addition, in some cases , required inputs such as biological control agents for 
a climate resilient sound agriculture are not available.  As a result, there is l imited technical and institutional 
capacities to adopt and scale up climate smart technologies in agricultural production. Farmers experiences and 
knowledge are not shared, and power of gremios is not effectively utilized.  
47. viii) Limited knowledge of contr ibuting factors to climate smart agricultural technologies uses and adoption by 
farmers in the targeted value chains . Despite continued research in the adoption of climate smart technologies in 
agricultural  production systems, there are still knowledge gaps in terms on what mechanisms and what influence 
some of these technologies may have in reducing climate vulnerability and GHG emissions.  
48. ix) Limited  access to productive factors and participation in labor and decision- making process by women and 
young farmers . Housework and unpaid care work are activities that fall on rural women, which considerably limits 
their labor participation and permanence in the paid labor market and decision- making in farming units. Additionally , 
women farmers and ranchers have less access to productive factors, such as land, credit and technology, which 
reduces their production potential in crop chains, and limits local economic development.  Additional details are 
described i n the Gender Assessment (Annex 8).  
49. x) Limited adoption of good practices to reduce environmental risks in at risk areas . There are risks of in paramo  
ecosystems of agricultural reconversion, especially when it comes to livestock activities . There is a need to 
implement measures to reduce the use of agrochemicals , and that farmer associations  review the existing protocols  
of agrochemical use to promote greater adopti on of good practices, in such a way that environmental risks can be 
reduced. in human health.  Further details are described in the Social and Environmental Risk Assessment (Annex 
6). 
50. Project activities to overcome barriers and catalyze transformational change . Based on the identification of 
the barriers, this project develops three Components, s ix results  and their respective activities to reduce or eliminate 
these barriers  (see diagram of Theory of Change and Table B.2.1). Specifically, the barrier (i)  of limited capacity 
for analysis and information management in agricultural extension services  will be addressed by Result  1.1 that 
seeks to modernize and expand the coverage of agricultural extension services  in Colombia by training technicians 
in the management of digital tools so that the recommendations of the technicians to the producers are reliable, 
timely and specific by site, resulting in agility and lower cost for the provision of agricultural extensi on services . The 
activities of Resul t 1.1 will be coordinated with the activities of Resul t 3.2 (capacity building and knowledge transfer) , 
which is transversal to Components 1 and 2.  
51. In the case of barrier (ii)  of limited use and adequate application of agroclimatic information, it will be addressed 
by Resul t 1.2 of agroclimatic information services , which seeks the design and/or strengthen agroclimatic 
information services for the various agricultural value chains. In this case, it seeks to expand the coverage of 
agroclimatic information services for new production systems (potatoes, sugarcane, livestock, bananas and 
plantains) and strengthening of existing agroclimatic information services which function independently in rice, corn, 
sugarcane and coffee. These activities will be coordinated with Resul ts 1.1 and 3. 2. As a result of the activities 
under Component 1, the agricultural value chains are expected to have greater resilience and adaptability to 
extreme weather events and impacts of climate change, which translates into lower losses compared to expected and/or historical scenarios. similar for each activity. This will improve the well -being of producer families and the 
socio -environmental sustainability of Colombian agriculture.  
52. Component 2  seeks the massive implementation of technologies and crop management options that allow 
improving the resilience of productive systems and low -carbon agricultural development, considering alternatives 
for geneti c improvement, efficient use of water resources, soil and other adaptation and mitigation options. In this 
case , the barrier (iii)  of limited knowledge of genetic resources and their tolerance to climate variability will be 
addressed by Resul t 2.1, which seeks to strengthen the germplasm bank, the development of new varieties  and 
massive multiplication of seeds adapted to conditions. extremes of precipitation and temperature and/or that lead 
to a lower emission of greenhouse gases. Barrier (iv)  of limited knowledge about the water footprint and water 
efficient technologies and barrier (v)  of limited knowledge of the carbon footprint at the crop and technology level 
will be addressed by Resul t 2.2 which focuses on the development and scaling of crop management techniques 
and other low -carbon and climate- resilient technology options, in coordination with Components  3.1 and 3.2. As a 
result, it is expected that these improved practices and technologies will be implemented together with the farmer 
groups , which would result in the strategic agricultural production value chains for the country with greater 
productivity, sustai nability and adaptability to climate change.


---
*Page 22*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 20 OF 75 
 
 53. Component 3  seeks to facilitate the strengthening of agriculture business models by enabling ownership, 
transfer and use of the knowledge generated in components 1 and 2 through innovative, inclusive and digitally 
enabled approaches  for meeting farmers needs and by ac tively involving financial institutions to understand 
gremios  and farmers efforts to de- risk agricultural production systems and incentivizing them to use project’s 
information to inform the development of tailored financial instruments. Hence, barrier (vi ) will be addressed 
by Resul t 3.1 through which business models in prioritized value chains will be analyzed to identify 
opportunities to engage with potential buyers in climate- resilient and low carbon markets, while involving 
financial institutions; barrier (vii)  will be addressed by  Resul t 3.2, which will allow gremios to improve their 
knowledge transference using innovative, inclusive, and digitally enabled approaches. Finally, barrier s (viii), 
(ix) and (x ) will be addressed transversally by Components 1, 2 and 3, as they implement related activities to 
gender, social and environmental issues, as well as impact evaluation of project activities . 
54. Risks . Among the identified risks for this project is that farmers and ranchers tend to be very conservative when 
adapting to new t echnologies, varieties or crops, presenting a very important but passive resistance to the 
introduction of new profitable procedures or systems. There are also possible incorrect design or management  of 
field trials, failures in partnership agreements or i nstitutional settings that may hinder the transfer and adoption of 
crop technologies. Potential issues regarding local governance or mechanisms that may limit sustainability of the 
interventions. Delay in planned scheduled works, including the acquisition of inputs, human resources, materials 
and tools. Finally, the project will carry out activities in remote areas with difficult access, which represents a risk 
for the execution of the project in terms of delays and costs.  This also poses potential issues related to use of site 
and time specific information and internet connectivity and coverage, especially in remote areas with low 
connectivity . 
55. Assumptions . It is noteworthy that the project outcomes will be achieved through implementation of the project 
activities under the assumptions of: i) Farmers remain interested and actively participate in project activities; adopt technological packages and best management practices ; ii) Key stakeholders such as farmer associations and 
organizations are effect ively engaged, support the initiative and are willing to participate , and t he capacities created 
in the farmer associations are maintained and renewed periodically ; iii) Technicians participate 
in the training 
activities , and develop activities where they can share their knowledge; iv) Trainings and farmer -to-farmer 
exchanges are effective/sufficient to enable and speed up the adoption of low carbon climate- resilient agriculture 
practices ; v) Agro- climatic information generated is received effectively by farmers, which maintains farmers’ 
interest in actively participating in the project. Farmers attend the trainings and know how to use the information; 
vi) technologies, tools, and strategies are available and respond to the needs of the sect or; vii) The information is 
disseminated and the organizations / institutions are able to access it ; and f ield activities for variety development 
are not delayed by severe weather events.  
 
B.3. Projec t/programme description (max . 2000 words, approximately 4 pages ) 
56. Project components. The project comprises three interconnected components and their respective activities 
aimed at reducing the vulnerability of agricultural production to climatic threats and the use of resources (water, 
fertilizers, energy): 1) Digital agriculture and clima te services for rural modernization with an emphasis on 
adaptation and mitigation; 2) Genetic improvement, crop management techniques and other technological options 
and their scaling- up to increase resilience and promote low -carbon agricultural development; and 3) Innovative and 
inclusive business models through modernized innovation systems and a more engaged financial sector . 
57. Component 1. Digital agriculture and climate services for rural modernization with an emphasis on 
adaptation and mitigation.  This component includes the design, assembly, implementation and operation of 
climate information services for technicians and producers. The objective is to improve decision- making at the 
producer level and avoid crop losses. As can be seen in Figure B.2.1 , this component includes early warning 
services on climate hazards, as well as other sophisticated warning systems on pests, diseases and other abiotic 
factors that can occur due to climatic phenomena. It also includes comprehensive territori al planning systems. Big 
data analysis, technological platforms and other digital agriculture tools will enable combining climate information 
with biophysical and agronomic information to select the most recommendable adaptation measures for producers. 
It foresees two main results : (i) Improved and inclusive decision making by farmers and gremios for climate change 
adaptation and mitigation in targeted value chains through the adoption of digital agriculture and, (ii) Increased 
adoption and improved use by farmers and gremios through of climate services . 
58. Result  1.1. Strengthened and moderniz ed agricultural extension system with an emphasis on adaptation and 
mitigation . The project seeks to modernize and expand the coverage of agricultural extension in Colombia for 
improved and inclusive decision making by farmers and gremios for climate change adaptation and mitigation in targeted value chains through the adoption of digital agriculture.  As a result, more than 2,200  technicians will be 
trained in using this type of tools and technicians' recommendations to producers will be reliable, timely (available 
when required) and site- specific, thereby resulting in a more agile and less costly provision of agricultural extensi on 
services. Deliverables  under this component will include the design, assembly, implementation and operation of 
seven (7)  Big Data platform s to supply analyzed and processed information that considers user’s social, ethnic and


---
*Page 23*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 21 OF 75 
 
  
5 In the case of coffee cultivation, the currently available SICA system handles a good volume of variables and therefore, it w as not included 
in this component. Nonetheless, information from the SICA system will be analyzed in other components of this proj ect. gender differences,  and the  empowerment of producer associations to deliver recommendations on adaptation and 
mitigation measures to producers.  It is considered that r ice, coffee and sugarcane crops are the most advanced in 
implementing these practices, while livestock and maize ar e close behind and banana, potato and panela cane are 
the least advanced in this sense. This is why different activities will be carried out depending on the different crops 
and producer associations. For livestock and for potato, banana and plantain crops , this platform will be fully 
implemented. In the case of panela sugarcane, the SRIA platform for information collection is currently available. 
Therefore, the scope will be aimed at improving and expanding information- collection processes, setting up the 
information processing and analysis system and developing the system to produce outputs. In the case of rice and maize, the output will be aimed at improving Big Data platforms, expanding information, updating and improving 
information processing algorithms, with special emphasis on generating platform- based outputs. In the case of 
sugarcane, a Big Data system is already operating, and therefore, it will be complemented with necessary 
information- collection instruments related to some variables, including w ater availability for cultivation5. 
59. In all cases, the Big Data platforms  will be administered by the producer associations and AGROSAVIA, in an effort 
to promote the adoption and use of these instruments as inputs for the National Unified Agricultural and Rural 
Information System, without generating additional and permanent long- term costs for the national government (this 
aspect will be clearly defined in  the different implementation agreements  with the strategic partners (research 
institutions and gremios ). This Result  will be under the leadership of the Digital Inclusion team of the CIAT -Bioversity 
Alliance. This team will coordinate implementation with the producer associations’ teams and AGROSAVIA. It 
includes the following activities:  
• Activity 1.1.1. Organize the information from the different repositories and producer association databases (public and free- access systems) to connect them with updated information available from existing free-
access platforms through remote sensing or other sources. This includes: i) developing a data collection 
strategy linked to environmental, social, technological, productive and economic indicators   
and local 
knowledge ; ii) developing a protocol to integrate databases with existing crop information; iii) processing and 
cleaning information in the databases; iv) consolidating processed information in a database management 
system; v) analyzing data using machine learning and computational optimization methods; vi) disseminating 
results in workshops or field days.  
• Activity 1.1.2. Develop a bot -based digital instrument to strengthen the extension service. There are plans to 
develop communication tools that facilitat e human- machine interaction to provide automatic answers to 
frequently asked questions in conversations between farmers and technicians. This will facilitate sharing the 
recommendations derived from data analysis, as well as agroclimatic forecasts. This in cludes: i) testing 
pattern recognition models in texts that producers and technicians have exchanged; ii) engaging with potential 
users  of different sex, age, cultural and socioeconomic backgrounds  to collect a baseline of the information 
more frequently r equired for decision making , as well as the most frequently used information channels . This 
will be done through workshops, interviews, questionnaires and possibly focus groups; iii) creating an 
automatic wizard to exchange agroclimatic information with pr oducers, through chats or text messages on 
planting dates, choice of varieties and rain forecasts, among others.  
• Activity 1.1.3. Design and develop the entire data mining and analysis operating system that will allow 
interconnecting all available informati on. In turn, systems will be developed to enable the automatization of 
analysis and modeling processes, in an effort to encourage more robust recommendations and more agile 
and efficient processes. This includes: i) monitoring the crop cycle using remote s ensors (satellite images 
and drones) and non- remote sensors (soil moisture sensors, electroconductivity, leaf moisture sensors); ii) 
establishing field and flight sensors to capture images using drones; iii) designing a data management system 
that allows s earching for information, downloading and processing it; iv) analyzing the information and 
validating and disseminating the results.  
• Activity 1.1.4. Train technicians in the use and application of advanced data analysis methods, including: i) 
holding in- person and virtual training workshops, and short -term stays of professionals from producer 
associations at CIAT and other centers of excellence, to develop skills in the use of data mining, evolutionary 
computing and remote sensors to generate information for decision -making in the field; ii) Developing, 
validating and implementing a module based on graphical interfaces to facilitate data analysis and 
consultation, aimed at producer association technicians; iii) Training of trainers on Information Literacy  for 
producers with an ethnic and gender focus and develop and implement dissemination means, including 
communication platforms. This seeks to expand the number of users served under Activities 1.1.1 and 1.1.3.  
60. Result  1.2. Agroclimatic services in place and/or strengthened.  This will support the i ncreased adoption and 
improved use by farmers and gremios of accessible climate services and information to reduce agroclimatic risks . 
As a result, t he project will allow to provide timely and reliable information to more than one million users (considered 
indirect beneficiaries) on the main climatic threats and crop management recommendations to avoid losses. The


---
*Page 24*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 22 OF 75 
 
  
6 Monitoring and evaluation will be carried out as part of the impact evaluation component and will focus on a representative s ample of these 
producers.  
7 See Appendix 3 in Annex 2.  Project will ensure technical support in the implementation of adaptation and mitigation measures to about 49,200 
of these producers, who are considered direct project beneficiaries. The project will follow -up on these beneficiaries 
and will evaluate6 results achieved. This component includes the design and implem entation of early warning 
platforms that provide accurate and timely information to farmers by generating climate predictions, using simulation 
models and Big Data information.  A platform for climate services in rice and maize crops is currently operating. It was designed, installed and put into operation as part of the pilot carried out in the context of the MADR -CIAT 
agreement. Platforms for the cultivation of sugarcane and coffee operate independently . 
61. A first step in this activity is to expand the cove rage of services to other crops (potato, panela sugarcane, livestock, 
banana and plantain), and this requires purchasing, installing and calibrating equipment to measure and record 
climatic and related variables. Data collection, storage and analysis, clim ate predictions, crop modeling, climate-
crop integration, process automation and an information query platform are also required.  Information systems will 
be strengthened with new -generation models and improved performance of climate predictions and crop modeling. 
Likewise, for some crops, there will be a transition towards new alert services related to pests, diseases, abiotic 
factors and water use planning in irrigation systems. In this case, it is necessary to move forth in developing, 
calibrating and v alidating pest and disease behavior modeling, and hydrological modeling at the supply basin level.  
62. This Resul t will be under the leadership of the Climate Action team of the CIAT -Bioversity Alliance, which will 
coordinate its implementation with the producer associations’ and Agrosavia’s teams. It includes the following 
activities : 
• Activity 1.2.1. Design and/or strengthen agroclimatic information services. It seeks to expand the coverage 
of information services  to reduce t he agroclimatic risk for new productive systems (potatoes, panela 
sugarcane, livestock, banana and plantain) and strengthen existing agroclimatic information services which function independently for rice, corn, sugarcane and coffee. Under this activity, t he deliverables include
 four 
(4) improved agroclimatic platforms with better forecasting performance (sugarcane, coffee, rice and maize)  
and f ive (5) new agroclimatic platforms in operation (potato, panela sugarcane, livestock, banana and 
plantain) . This includes: i) evaluating climate forecasts at different time scales (e.g., seasonal, sub- seasonal) 
and developing a protocol for the use of climate information; ii) Developing a network to collect climate 
information (meteorological stations  network) in already selected prioritized sites;7 iii) Identifying and mapping 
areas that are vulnerable to experience water and biological stress, based on their water supply; iv) creating, 
structuring and implementing the Cenicaña AgroClimate Service for the Cauca River Valley, including the automation of the productivity prediction system for sugarcane and the analysis of climatic variables; and v) 
adjusting and validating climate prediction models in coffee and its relationship with diseases, and making 
recommendations.  
• Activity 1.2.2. Develop more accurate and precise climate and weather prediction models and complementary improved crop simulation models  by using new -generation climate models, improving the performance of 
climate prediction models, modeling crop physiological processes, including alerts for pests, diseases and other abiotic factors (for example, frosts), and irrigation planning and optimization.  
• Activity 1.2.3. Connect agroclimatic forecasts with artificial intelligence models  (Result  1.1). This includes : i) 
integrating agroclimatic forecasts in the design and implementation of early warning platforms that use climate 
forecasts, simulation models and Big Data information to provide accurate and timely information to farmers 
and t echnicians ; ii) Usability tests with producers of agroclimatic platforms and mass dissemination systems ; 
iii) Adjustments in outputs and generation of new services based on needs ; iv) Generation of visualization 
interfaces targeted at different users accor ding to agroclimatic information needs . 
• Activity 1.2.4. Strengthen mechanisms to disseminate agroclimatic information and transfer capacities . 
Ensure the operation of at least 15 Agroclimatic Technical Working Groups (MTA) , with diverse 
representation,  and provide training for their members and other actors in order to strengthen the 
dissemination of climate services to technicians and producers in other crops , considering the different needs, 
interest and constraints of different types of producers . Mor eover, develop content and circulate  
recommendations through diverse media and dissemination mechanisms and tools (including digital tools) in 
order to reach one million users . This includes generating agroclimatic information and including it in the 
Aclim ateColombia (www.aclimatecolombia.org), SIPA (sugarcane), and ASISTEGAN (livestock) platforms.  
• Activity 1.2.5. Other activities related to producing, transferring or using agroclimatic information (automation of meteorological information, analysis of climate change signals, nutrient balance models).  In the case of 
sugarcane, the analysis of meteorological information and climate forecasts will be automated, allowing early 
decision -making to mitigate the effects of climate variability on production. Sim ilarly, the producer association 
plans to study the signs of climate change and climate forces in the Cauca River Valley, to produce 
information to mitigate the climate change effects in the entire value chain of the sugarcane industry. In the


---
*Page 25*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 23 OF 75 
 
  
8 Seed multiplication is a very heterogeneous process that varies pe r crop. For example, for rice the certified seed market (40- 65% of the 
cultivated area) is mostly represented by four producing companies (FEDEARROZ, Semillano, Semillas Huila- Pajonales). For corn  seeds, 
the main actors are transnational companies (Pionner , Monsanto, Syngenta, Advanta), Fenalce and Semivalle. Fenalce receives the support 
of international entities such as CIMMYT. In the case of potatoes , is mostly grown on the basis of informal seed with only 5% of the total area 
planted us ing certified seed . In sugarcane, there is no private market for seed, and producers, through their associations, are responsible for 
all research. In coffee , the National Coffee Research Center (CENICAFE) is in charge of an improved seed production system. F or bananas, 
the seeds come from in vitro cultivation, a high percentage of which are distributed by the company Rahan Meristem.  case of coff ee, there is a proposal to use the information generated by Cenicafé and new research to model 
nutrient input and output in coffee production systems in the context of climate variability. Finally, in the case 
of rice, there are plans to evaluate the water  balance and fertilization modules of the rice cultivation models, 
in order to expand their application in decision- making and in the optimization of natural and agro- industrial 
resources.  
63. Component 2. Genetic improvement, crop management techniques and other technological options and their scaling -up to increase climate resilience and promote low -carbon agricultural development. This 
component comprises technologies and crop management options to improve the resilience of productive systems and promote low -carbon agricultural development , and considers alternatives for genetic improvement, efficient 
use of water resources and soil, and other adaptation and mitigation options. This component considers two 
thematic Resul ts with their corresponding results and activities as described below:  
64. Result  2.1. Strengthened germplasm bank, new climate resilient varieties developed and their seeds massively 
distributed . This will allow the a doption by farmers and gremios of new climate smart practices, technologies and 
varieties.  As a result of this activity, more than 123,000 hectares will implement the practices, technologies and 
varieties proposed by the Project. This component includes developing a state- of-the-art phenotyping platform 
designed to identify climate- resistant genetic resources8 aimed at developing heat- and drought -resistant, nitrogen-
use efficient and low -GHG emission accessions  for rice, maize, bananas, sugarcane, panela sugarcane, coffee, 
potatoes and livestock.  
65. This component  will be under the leadership of the Crops for Nutrition and Health team of the CIAT - Bioversity  
Alliance, which will coordinate implementation with the producer associations’ and Agrosavia’s teams. It includes 
the following activities:  
• Activity 2.1.1. Develop a state -of-the-art phenotyping platform designed to identify low carbon production and 
climate -resistant genetic resources. It will initially be tested and validated with beans .  Once the tests have 
been carried out, the platform wi ll be made available to rice and livestock (forages). This includes: i) Installing, 
calibrating and testing growth chambers designed to simulate future climatic conditions by manipulating 
lighting, temperature and relative humidity; ii) Installing and test ing field equipment that supports the capture 
of sensor images and data; iii) Calibrating and testing cameras and sensors to quantify the impact of abiotic 
stresses on photosynthesis ; iv) Sequencing of parental genetic material and/or progeny ; v) Applicati on of a 
genomic selection model.  
• Activity 2.1.2. Identify heat , drought  and excess water tolerant accessions  for rice, maize, potatoes, 
Musaceae, and livestock (forages), including: i) Detecting physiological traits using the phenotyping platform 
described in Activity 2.1.1; ii) DNA sequencing to identify regions of the genome that control the traits 
assessed ; iii) Identify traits to increase crop resilience; iv ) Selection and evaluation under controlled 
conditions for water deficit, low nitrogen and waterlogging of elite parenta l lines . 
• Activity 2.1.3. Develop new varieties from advanced lines for climate change adaptation and mitigation for 
rice, maize, livestock, banana (varieties that are tolerant or resistant to water deficit and diseases that demand high use of chemical fungicides, such as black Sigatoka) and sugarcane (water deficit, waterlogging and 
greate
r efficiency in nitrogen use). This includes: i) selecting and evaluating advanced varieties under 
controlled conditions (greenhouse, laboratory) that simulate climate change environments: water deficit, 
salinity, low nitrogen, waterlogging; ii) Genetic characterization and creation of the elite parents bank ; iii) New 
crosses with promising lines ; iv) Validation and performance evaluation of materials developed in other 
countries but that have not been tested in Colombia; v) Selection of lines with better performance ; vi) 
Evaluation of greenhouse gas emissions of different genetic materials ; vii)  Materials registration process  and 
release of new materials.  
• Activity 2.1.4. Massive seed multiplication for coffee, sugarcane, panela sugarcane, potato, b anana and 
plantain through in vitro culture or the buds method for distribution to farmers . The application of techniques 
to massively multiply outstanding variety seeds  and the design of a gender -responsive delivery strategy 
(including the collection of gender -differentiated feedback on the new varieties), thereby allow ing for large-
scale adoption of the varieties developed throughout the Project.  This includes establish a thermotherapy 
protocol, clean by cryopreservation, multiplication of the material, d etection of virus and diseases, 
implementation of the in- vitro technique of Somatic Embryogenesis (SE) and implementation of bioreactors 
for scale up.


---
*Page 26*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 24 OF 75 
 
 66. Result 2.2. More efficient use of water resources, restoring soil properties, and improving GHG mitigation practices 
by farmers and gremios through the adoption of new climate smart practices and technologies . This component 
seeks to support c rop management techniques and other technological options and their scaling- up to increase 
resilience and mit igation in the targeted value chains  for different types of farmers . This considers the validation 
and incorporation of sustainable production practices that allow more efficient use of water resources, restoring soil 
properties, reducing GHG emissions or increasing carbon capture, while enabling productivity increases. As a result 
of th ese interventions , more than 9, 230 hectares will implement the technologies , of which 8,750 benefit the 
reduction of GHG emissions . It is expected that there will be a reduction of 432,297 tons of CO 2e during the project 
lifespan, at a rate of 18,796 tons of CO2e per year.  
67. Under this component , sustainable management practices will be formulated and implemented at a large scale. 
These include the incorporation of rationa l use of fertilizers and bioproducts (potatoes, maize, rice, panela 
sugarcane, banana , plantain and coffee), optimization of irrigation systems (rice, potato, plantain and banana), 
conservation agriculture (potato and maize), use of harvest residues (coffe e, maize, banana), low -emission planting 
materials (rice and sugarcane), optimization of processing systems (panela, and coffee), water harvesting (rice, panela, coffee and plantain) , enclosures of riverine corridors and assisted restoration (for sugar cane), enclosures 
of biological corridors, riverine corridors, living fences, intensive and non- intensive silvo- pastoral systems, pasture 
rotation, scattered trees in pastures, and hedges fodder (for livestock) . This component  will be under the leadership 
of the Multifunctional Landscapes team of the CIAT -Bioversity Alliance, which will coordinate implementation with 
the producer associations’ and AGROSAVIA’s teams. It includes the following activities:  
• Activity 2.2.1. Quantify ing the baseline water footprint in six (6) crops (potato, sugarcane,  panela sugarcane 
bananas, plantains, and livestock) and in the industrial phase of sugar production. This includes: i) Designing 
and selecting experimental plots; ii) Installing monitori ng sensors; iii) Measuring water balance and water 
quality, iv) Quantifying the water footprint and identifying critical points of high water consumption.  
• Activity 2.2.2. Quantifying the baseline carbon footprint for seven (7) crops (rice, potato, sugarcane , panela 
cane, bananas, plantain, and livestock), fertilizer use and industrial processing in sugarcane cultivation. This 
includes: i) Collecting information on activities in cultivation and transformation processes; ii) Building a 
database with emission factors in cultivation and manufacturing; iii) Quantifying the carbon footprint and 
identifying the critical points.  
• Activity 2.2.3. Hydrological modeling of basins to identify water harvesting points in rice, panela cane, 
bananas,  and coffee production systems. This includes: i) Collecting spatial and hydroclimatic information in 
the basin; ii) Designing and validating with men and women farmers of different ages and socioeconomic 
backgrounds the hydrological model and creating scenarios of changes in coverage and climate forecast; iii) 
Mapping, identifying and validating water harvesting points; iv) Generating water conveyance routes; v) 
Building water reservoirs (in the case of panela cane, plantain and coffee); vi) Training works hops for 
professional associations’ staff  (e.g. agricultural engineers) ; vii) Efficient planning of water uses at the level 
of irrigation districts . 
• Activity 2.2.4. Evaluation of efficient water use practices in agronomic management and transformation 
processes (e.g., milling of panela cane) in potato, panela cane, plantain, banana, coffee crops and livestock. 
This includes: i) Identifying and formulating agronomic management practices and industrial transformation; ii) Selecting and implementing convention
al productive plots with efficient use practices; iii) Installing 
equipment to monitor moisture balance; iv) Creating moisture balance and monitoring water quality; v) 
Quantifying the water footprint in conventional systems and efficient water use practice s; vi) Training 
workshops for producers on monitoring and managing efficient water use systems.  
• Activity 2.2.5. Evaluation of GHG emission mitigation practices in agronomic management and transformation 
processes in rice, maize, potato, panela cane, planta in, banana, coffee, sugarcane crops, and livestock. This  
includes: i) Identifying productive typologies   considering gender and socioeconomic related variables ; ii) 
Implementing productive plots to monitor conventional systems and practices with mitigatio n potential; iii) 
Collecting information regarding activity data; iv) Installing and monitoring static cameras to collect soil -
released GHG samples; v) Generating emission factors; vi) Quantifying the carbon footprint in conventional 
systems and systems wi th practices with mitigation potential; vii) Training workshops for producers on 
monitoring and managing practices with mitigating potential.  
• Activity 2.2.6. Landscape restoration in sugarcane cultivation and livestock systems. The activities that will 
be developed include enclosures of riverine corridors and assisted restoration (for sugar cane), enclosures 
of biological corridors, riverine corridors, living fences, intensive and non- intensive silvo -pastoral systems, 
pasture rotation, scattered trees in pastures, hedges fodder (for livestock).  Under this activity, the project will 
support with: i) Prioritizing activities and i dentifying potential intervention areas and landscape units  through 
inclusive participatory processes ; ii) Using a nursery for the propagation of native species  targeting the 
engagement of women farmers ; iii) Coverage mapping; iv) Implementation  of the identified interventions .


---
*Page 27*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 25 OF 75 
 
 • Activity 2.2.7. Massive implementati on of agronomic management technologies and transformation 
processes that enable more efficient use of water and promote low -carbon development in rice, maize, potato, 
sugarcane, plantain, banana, and livestock production. This includes: i) Identifying production typologies and 
selecting producers for implementation; ii) Training producers and other actors in the implementation and 
management of sustainable production practices  including targeted trainings for women climate resilient 
agriculture focused on the tasks  they perform within each crop/chain (e.g. seed selection, diversification of 
crops, subsistence farming, pre and post -harvest ); iii) Co -designing systems to be implemented  through 
inclusive participatory processes  with producers; iv) Generating dissemination material   suitable for different 
types of farmers ; v) Implementing sustainable systems/practices at the regional level.  
68. Component 3. Innovative and inclusive business models through modernized innovation systems and a 
more engaged financial sector .  The generation, massive transfer and scaling- up of technological options require 
modernized innovation systems to permanent ly support relevant cross -cutting issues to ensure that: (i)  
technological options enable the development of innovative business models that mainstream its benefits over time across key agricultural sector stakeholders, including financial institutions; (ii)  this technological options  reach the 
largest possible number of users  through considering  the different needs,  capacities, knowledge and conditions of 
the various producer and population groups (women, men, youth, elderly), as well as the different social and 
environmental contexts, and (iii) the impacts of the project are properly recorded and analyzed.  
69. This component aims to support the development of science- based business models and the modernization of 
innovation systems to reach producers effectively, by enhancing the dialogue between technician -technician  and 
producer -producer through digitally -enabled tools and approaches for sharing knowledge and experiences , and 
increased awareness of gender -based constraints to the adoption of sustainable production systems and capacities 
to address these. A key focus of this component is understanding prioritized value chains and use project’s results 
in other components to identify climate- resilient and low carbon markets in which gremios, agri -business and 
farmers can offer their value proposition and open new commercial opportunities. A second focus of this  component  
is the bringing gremios and different types of farmers to develop modernized innovation systems  that incorporate 
the advantages of the digital era. This modernization involves the strengthening institutional capacities to increase 
coverage of extension services, which will rely on new knowledge generated by producer association professionals  
through two- way digitally enabled tools . In this component, the project will closely engage with financial institutions 
both national and local so that they know and understand the strategies that gremios and farmers will implement 
for de- risking agricultural investments within the framework of the project, highlighting the need for tailored financial 
mechanisms and products to enable benefits beyond project’s life. The training and capacity -building strategy of 
this component will contemplate the relationship with the Departmental Agricultural Extension Plans (PDEA), 
providing support on agro- climatic risk management and climate change adaptation, t hrough information, 
generation of new knowledge and technology transfer processes. This component will result in two result areas , 
which are described below with their corresponding activities:  
70. Result  3.1. Improved business models that provide farmers with reasonable profits and improved GHG mitigation 
practices . The agricultural private sector (gremios, service providers and farmers) will increase its capacity to 
identify  novel and inclusive business models.  As a result of this component , gende r sensitive value chain analysis 
will be developed  for specific cases to identify additional and/or new market opportunities for climate- resilient and 
low-carbon agricultural products and/or services. With the support  of the project’s expert team,  a strateg ic plan will 
be co- developed with the relevant gre mios  for high- potential opportunities. Through this component , financial 
institutions will be engaged in four relevant geographic areas in which the MTAs are in place, so that they receive regular information on de- risking strategies implemented in C omponent s 1 and 2 and engage with gremios, service 
providers and farmers to better understand their needs and opportunities to support the transition towards a more 
climate -resilient and low -carbon agriculture.  This component  includes the following activities:  
• Activity 3.1.1. Strengthen gremios capacities to use digitally enabled tools that improve the provision of 
services to farmers with emphasis on profitable production system that also reduce GHG emissions and 
increase climate- resilience . This activity supports gremios  efforts to enhance their extension and knowledge 
transfer functions by using, inter alia, digital tools to increase the understanding and provide more appropriate 
response to farmers demands while strengthening processes of allocation of resour ces to provide services 
to farmers. These activities are conceptually aligned with an innovation systems approach.  This will include: 
i) Assessment of gremios capabilities and needs, as well as, opportunities to better -inform their allocation of 
resources (human, financial) to respond to farmers demands and help them to manage climate to their 
advantage; ii) Co-design of implementation plans for gremios to the decision- making processes to cost -
effectively enhance their provision of climate- related services to farmers ; iii) Co -develop feedback loop 
mechanisms to provide information to the gremios to inform allocation of resources/efforts (human, financial) 
for climate- related services provision to farmers . 
• Activity 3.1.2. Implement inclusive climate- resilient and low -carbon business models for agricultural products 
and services . Investment by gremios  and farmers in low carbon and climate resilient  options is expected to 
reward farmers with tangible benefits, therefore, market opportunities wil l need to be assessed  so that farmers


---
*Page 28*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 26 OF 75 
 
 can explore alternatives to increase their supply, enter specialized markets, increase revenue due to due to 
increased added value, among others. This activity will provide technical support and facilitate producer -
buyer -consumer to explore these alternatives. This activity includes a gender -sensitive analysis of the value 
chains and definition of sectoral strategies with a focus on low carbon and climate resilient activities , in 
addition to the co- design and validation of business models, includ ing: i) Systematization of the results 
generated by the components of the project on digital agriculture, climate- smart and low -carbon practices to 
guide its inclusion into business models; ii) Coordinate producers, gremios , buyers and other actors in the 
value chains , to prioritize opportunities for improvement, as well as address barriers that limit the escalation 
of climate resili ence  and low emission practices  and the inclusion of women farmers and other vulnerable 
groups wherever these have been previously excluded, or the recognition and appropriate valuation of their 
contributions ; iii) Design of an escalation strategy (with g remios , producers and other actors) that allows the 
integration of digital agriculture elements and climate services to the value chains, to increase climate 
resilience and mitigate GHG emissions; iv) Implement business models for producers and buyers, to enhance 
climate mitigation practices and evaluate market opportunities for differential products; v) Evaluate changes 
in the business models of producers and buyers, and identify lessons learned and success factors in scaling 
up digital agriculture mechani sms and low -carbon practices in the value chains.  
• Activity 3.1.3. Enhance financial sector engagement with farmers and their needs and efforts on climate-
resilience and climate mitigation activities . This will involve fostering the financial sector to develop tailored 
financial products that supports gremios and different types of farmers to de- risk agriculture by implementing 
climate -resilient and low -emissions options. Furthermore, the financial sec tor is expected to be a user of 
project’s relevant information through digitally enabled tools so as to make better informed financial market decisions based on the specific conditions in time and space.  This will include: i) Implementation of a capacity 
building program to raise awareness of financial sector institutions  on mid and long- term de -risking 
mechanisms that the project will implement throughout its components ; ii) 
Facilitate participation and 
involvement of financial institutions in the MTAs ; iii)  Identify opportunities with financial institutions and 
prioritize cases studies to provide technical support for incorporating climate- resilient and low -carbon criteria 
to their agricultural financial products . 
• Activity 3.1.4. Fostering agri -digital en trepreneurship ecosystems . This activity aims to explore and identify 
potential opportunities for creating new ventures and transforming existing businesses by developing new digital technologies or experimenting with novel digital services to help farmers  and others along the supply 
chain.  This will include: i) 
Explore and identify potential opportunities for new ventures ; ii) support creation of 
new ventures and transforming existing businesses by developing new digital technologies . 
71. Result  3.2. Modernized technical assistance and agricultural extension services  with multi- tool strategies, 
differentiated and adapted to specific environmental, social, gender and productive contexts at the national level . 
As part of the overall modernization of the services provided by the growers’ associations the technical assistance 
and transfer  systems will be updated. The renovated and up- to-date systems will be built on the principles of sharing 
information from multi ple sources compiled and analyzed in digitally enabled tools and made available to farmers 
in interactive formats which will facilitate group discussions on the available options. This will result in farmers aware 
of options for improved management of thei r crops with emphasis on profitability, efficient use of resources and 
reduced GHG emissions. As a result of this component , more than 60 sector entities and more than 2,200 
technicians (producer associations, sector entities, private sector and students) will be trained in climate change 
resilience and mitigation (besides the 2,200 individuals trained under Component 1). The scope in this component  
refers to the increase in the capacities of producers, professionals, institutions and other actors of the pr oductive 
chains considered in the Project. Strengthening knowledge, encouraging changes in people’s attitudes towards 
technologies or processes, and developing new skills are required to bring about a change in capacities and to 
ensure that beneficiaries make routine and sustainable changes to their practices .  This component  also considers 
using various communication means and defining appropriate language, materials  and messages for different types 
of audiences. This includes the following activities:  
• Activity 3.2.1. Foster inclusion of two- way digitally enabled tools for enhancing models for technology transfer 
technical assistance within an innovations system appro ach. Updating and implementing strategies to 
transfer producer associations’ technologies and extension services, as well as plans to link producers, 
organizations and other actors for the project sectors  including: i) Linking plans directed by Agrosavia, for 
Musaceae , potato and panela cane; HUB innovation model applied by CIMMYT for maize; Knowledge 
Management Model in Sustainable Livestock by Fedegan; Dissemination campaigns of the National 
Extension Service of the National Federation of Coffee Growers;  AMTEC mass adoption model in rice; The 
technical cooperation and technology transfer service (SCTT) with the network of Technology Transfer 
Groups (GTT) in sugarcane; Rural School Methodology (ECAS) by Asohofrucol -  Musaseas; ii) Exchange of 
experiences; iii) Use of voice (IVR) and text (SMS) messaging, WhatsApp networks and chatbot; iv) Producer 
association digital platforms or available mobile applications.


---
*Page 29*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 27 OF 75 
 
  
9 The MHCP will set up two separate accounts, one for loan resources and another for the grant resources. From these accounts M HCP will 
disburse to the MADR, as EE, according to the requirements of the project.  
10 The review of CIAT capacities by CAF shows that: i) it is an international non- profit organization with legal status, (ii) it is committed to 
complying with local laws in  all countries where it operates, (iii) its Audit, Finance and Risk Committee -  AFRC - receives periodic updates on 
any risk materialization. Once the different documents were reviewed, it was concluded that CIAT has all the administrative, organizational,  
financial capacity, and technical to support the implementation of the CSICAP project.  • Activity 3. 2.2. Capability development on innovation systems approach and its inclusion into updated 
technology transfer plans.  Standardizing of languages and concepts use for collective knowledge 
construction and socialization, including: i) Organizing events to disseminate the project and its content; ii) 
Holding general training events by Resul t; iii) Work meetings; iv) Written, printed and digital material; v) 
Videos with project themes; vi) Agroclimatic Technical Working Groups.  
• Activity 3. 2.3. Strengthen gremios and farmers capacities on climate adaptation and mitigation and nurture 
knowledge exchanges across farmers groups.  Strengthening the capacities of beneficiaries regarding climate 
resilience, conducting analyses of the agricultural sector’s chains and business models, accompanied by an 
internal and external communication plan. This includes: i) Specific workshops by topic; ii) Operation planning 
meetings; iii) Workshops to create procedures, carry out experiments and analyze results jointly; iv) Three 
Communities of Practice on Digital Agriculture and Data Analysis, Climate Fore casts, and Communication 
and Outreach; v) Open training courses on specific topics on virtual education platforms; vi) Strengthening 
academic programs, thesis and internships.  
72. Activity 3.2.4. Develop a strategy that allows dissemination, access and use of project results by key public and 
private stakeholders . This in cludes: i) Holding management meetings together with national institutions; ii) 
Preparing executive reports for producer associations on the progress and needs to support service sustainability ; 
iii) Promoting communication through traditional and digital media, social networks, project website; iv) Developing 
infographics on the Project Identify.  
73. Several producer associations and AGROSAVIA have clear and validated strategies for their extension services 
and technology transfer. It is expected that by the end of the Project, the collaboration between all the producer 
associations will have strengthe ned and modernized these services. Analysis at the production chain level and the 
identification and implementation of business models with a view to promoting technology adoption and supporting the development of differentiated products are also considere d. This component  will be co -led by CIAT - Bioversity 
Alliance  teams of Sustainable finance , Inclusive Business Models, and  Knowledge Management , 
which will 
coordinate implementation with the producer associations’ and AGROSAVIA’s teams.  
74. Selection of benefi ciary producers. The producers participating in the project will be selected in coordination with 
the gremios based on the vulnerability of each municipality and adaptation needs, as well as other characteristics. 
The selection process will follow the requirements that the MADR usually determines in the different programs that 
are developed with public resources. A  procedure and schedule will be established for an open  call to those 
interested in participating in the pr oject, holding workshops to publicize the Project, presenting its scope and other 
relevant information, as well as the procedures and requirements requested and the means of receiving requests. The calls will be socialized with gremios , technicians, local institutions and community leaders from the project 
intervention areas. During the reception of requests from interested producers, it will be verified that they meet the 
minimum requirements to participate in the project ( e.g., at least 20% of their land in production of the crop from 
which they wish to receive project support). Once the producers have been selected, they must sign an act of 
commitment with the MADR 
to actively participate in the training provided by the project, to make use and 
applicatio n of technology, and to meet other requirements to ensure their participation in the project.  For the 
business model activities (3.1.2, 3.1.3 and 3.1.4) that are focused on other actors along the value chains, the same 
procedures will be followed.  See Appe ndix 3 in Annex 2 for further details on the selection of beneficiary producers 
and its  procedures and specific requirements  following the policies and guidelines from the MADR.  
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max.  1500 words , approximately 3 pages plus diagrams ) 
75. The Government of Colombia through the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit (MHCP) will be responsible for the 
reception of project resources, both credit and grant resources from the Green Climate Fund (GCF) as well as CAF financing resources
9. The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR) will be responsible for 
executing the project resources and technical implementation through its Direction of Innovation, Technological 
Development and Health Protection . In th is case, the CSICAP Project is presented as a national initiative under 
the leadership of MADR which, based on the good results and development of the 2012- 2015 pilot experience, 
considers replicating a similar framework for the implementation of the Project. The Government of Colombia will 
take loans from both GCF and CAF and will provide grants to the beneficiaries (gremios) given the public goods nature of the interventions (see
 Figure G.3.1. for the flow of funds of the project). T he MADR is the Executi ng Entity 
(EE). The MADR will be responsible for the project  financial execution and implementation before MHCP and CAF . 
CAF and the Government of Colombia, through MHCP and MADR, will enter a Subsidiary Agreement  for the use 
of GCF funds . MADR will carry out direct contracting with the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT )10


---
*Page 30*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 28 OF 75 
 
  
11 The direct contracting of CIAT will be carried out based on the Colombian national regulations as established in literal (e) numeral 4 of 
article 2 of Law 1150 of 2007 and by means of which the measures for efficiency and transparency are established in the Law 80 of 1993 and 
where the general provisions on contracting with public resources are dictated. As well as in accordance with article 2.2.1.2 .1.4.7 of Decree 
1082 of 2015, articles 2 and 17 of Decree -  Law 591 of 1991, article 33 of Law 1286 of 2009.  under the Colombian legal framework called the Technical and Scientific Cooperation Agreement .11 The 
Government of Colombia , acting through MADR , will retain the final approval authority over any matter/decision 
adopted by the project cooperation team/any other governance bodies or units.  MADR will have the support in the 
operation of the Project from the Alliance of B ioversity International and CIAT and the producer associations; 
following the regulations and frameworks defined and allowed by Colombian legislation.  These arrangements will 
be reflected in the agreement signed between the MADR and CIAT. In addition, CIAT will develop a model 
agreement to be approved by the MADR that will be signed with each of the gremios , including the details of the 
activities, the co-financing provided by each gremio and commitments acquired at the end of the project for its 
continuity . At the beneficiary level, and o nce producers have been selected, they will sign an act of commitment 
with the MADR to actively participate in the project  activities.  
76. CIAT, as procured party , will form a Project Coordination Team (PCT) that will be directly responsible for interacting 
with the Project Executing Unit (PEU) within MADR and responding to its technical and administrative requirements. 
The project coordination team (PCT) will consist of (1) project leader, (2) a technical associate, (3) a research 
assistant, (4) a project analyst, (5) a logistics assistant, and (6) two emer itus advisors on technical issues related 
to climate and agriculture. This team will be responsible for implementing the project and,  will guide the six theme 
leaders and eight crop coordinators. The team will work with the relevant  areas of MADR, CIAT, th e strategic 
partners, and any other institution, firm, or person contracted to provide a service or supply a good.  
77. This team will be responsible for the project’s institutional relations , led by the project leader, and therefore must 
respond to MADR , who will ensure the proper execution of the project and the adequate use of resources. The 
team will be responsible for preparing the technical reports and submitting to MADR and preparing the fin ancial 
report. CIAT, as main procured party , will operate from its hub in the city of Palmira, Valle del Cauca. The whole 
team of  the Project Executing Unit (P EU) will be covered by project resources. The interaction between MADR and 
CIAT will be carried o ut through the PEU  (MADR) and the PCT (CIAT).   
 
 
 
Figure B.4.1. Framework for engagement and interaction between MADR , as EE,  and the main procured party  
78. The Project Coordinating Team  (PCT) will have main them e coordinators and cross -cutting theme leaders. The 
project will have a group of six theme  leaders , comprised of CIAT staff based in the city of Palmira, Valle del Cauca. 
These are experts with PhDs and re nowned experts with at least 10 publications. These leaders will be responsible 
for implementing the activities of each of the project components. Each will have a budget subject to the project  
financial plan and procurement plan approved by the executing unit. Each  leader  is responsible for implementing 
the activities of each component and ensuring the achievement of their respective outputs and goals . 
• Main theme leader 1.  Agro -climatic Forecasting and D igital Agriculture Coordinator.  
• Main theme leader 2. W ater Efficient Use and Low Emission Technologies Coordinator.  
• Main theme leader 3.  Genebank Improvement and Strengthening Technologies Coordinator . 
• Cross -cutting theme leader 1. K nowledge Management and C apacity Building  Coordinator.  
• Cross -cutting theme leader 2. Environmental, Social and Gender Affairs Coordinator.


---
*Page 31*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 29 OF 75 
 
 • Cross -cutting theme leader 3. Impact Assessment Coordinator.  
79. The project will also have eight (8) crop coordinators , one for each crop. These coordinators are renowned 
experts in each of the crops, with PhD degrees and with at least 10 publications in the crop to be led, in indexed 
international journals. These professionals will be responsible for integrating each of the topics within each crop in 
order to achieve coherence, efficiency and coordination in the implementation processes. These coordinators will be responsible for giving direction and making proposals for improvement, adjustments or coordination activities  
as needed, which should be covered by the resources managed by the main and cross -cutting theme leaders, as 
appropriate, given that they will not have a budget allocated for costs other than the cost of their time dedicated to the project. This team will 
consist of staff from CIAT (livestock, rice, musaceae), CIMMYT (maize), Agrosavia 
(panela cane and potato), Cenicafe (coffee), and Cenicaña (sugarcane). CIAT and CIMMYT staff will be based in the city of Palmira, Valle del Cauca; Agrosavia in Bogotá at the Tibaitatá headquarters; Cenicafe in Chinchiná 
(Caldas); and Cenicaña in the municipality of Candelaria, Valle del Cauca. Figure B.4.2 shows the structure of CIAT´s work team.  
 
 
Figure B.4.2. Organigram of the main procured party (CIAT)  
 
80. Strategic partner s. The project will have thirteen (13) strategic partners for project implementation, of which 
there are ten (10) gremios and three (3) research institutions. For the execution of the C SICAP Project, CIAT will 
work in coordination with the following 10 gremios : Fedearroz (rice), Fenalce (maize), Fedegan (livestock), 
Fedepanela ( panela cane), Fedepapa (potato), Federación Nacional de Cafeteros -  Cenicafe (coffee), Asocaña -  
Cenicaña (sugarcane) , Augura, Asbama, and Aohofrucol (musaceae). Additionally , there are three (3) research 
institutions as part of the strategic implementing partners : the Colombian Agricultural Research Corporation 
(Agrosavia) , the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT) and the Center for Research on 
Sustainable Agricultural Production Systems (CIPAV) of Colombia (see Figure B.4.3). These strategic partners will 
have a role in the implementation of project activities and therefore will be assigned a budget that will be subject to 
outputs and deliverables. The importance of these partners lies in the fact that they are the institutions that will be 
responsible for the continuity and sustainability of the project actions once the project is completed.  
81. These strategic partners are national institutions  with presence in the different producing regions of each crop, with 
a high level of recognition and outreach to producers and a high level of technical knowledge of the production 
systems prioritized in the project. They are entities with financial capaci ty that will assume part of the costs of project 
implementation through the use of public funds assigned to them (“ fondos parafiscales ”).


---
*Page 32*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 30 OF 75 
 
  
Figure B.4.3 . Framework for working with strategic partners    
 
82. Project supervision structure . Two bodies will be formed to supervise the project technical and financial 
execution, the Monitoring Committee and the Steering Committee. The following is the governance structure, its 
conformation and functions of the different instances.  
 
 
 
Figur e B.4.4 . Project governance structure  
 
83. Monitoring Committee . The Monitoring Committee will be in charge of approving the progress on technical 
execution,  progress on financial execution, approving compliance with results, making recommendations, 
observations  and/or requesting adjustments. The Committee will have annual meetings. The Committee will be 
comprised of representatives of MADR (2 delegates: Vice Minister of Agricultural Affairs or his delegate and Director 
of Innovation, Technological Development and Sanitary Protection), CAF (1 delegate: country representative or his 
designee), DNP (2 delegates: Director of Sustainable Rural Development and Director of Environment and 
Sustainable Development), and MINHACIENDA (one delegate). Invited actors  include M ADS (Director of Climate 
Change), IDEAM (Director) and others upon approval of the monitoring  committee.  
84. Steering Committee . Its functions are to review the annual operating plan, provide strategic guidance to the 
project, make recommendations on actions and initiatives to achieve synergies with other projects, programs and 
policies, identify and recommend strategic partnershi ps to assist in scaling up project actions, review progress 
reports on technical execution, financial execution, and compliance with results to be presented to the monitoring 
committee . The Committee will meet every six months. The Steering Committee will be made up of representatives  
of MADR (2 delegates: Director of Innovation, Technological Development and Health Protection or his delegate 
and the project coordinator), DNP (2 delegates: the delegate of the Sustainable Rural Development Direct ion Office  
and the delegate of the Environment and Sustainable Development Direct ion Office or his del egate) and the 
Alliance of Bioversity International and CIAT  (1 delegate: project leader).  
B.5. Justification for GCF  funding request (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages)


---
*Page 33*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 31 OF 75 
 
 85. GCF Fund Justification . Given the high uncertainty and vulnerability to unexpected weather events, agricultural 
investments are risky. The GCF investment will help increase the adaptive capacity of farmers and ranchers and 
support the adoption of new agricultural technologies and practices to make them more resilient to climate change, 
while supporting GHG emissions  reductions . Colombia has suffered the consequences of climatic events that have 
affected important agricul tural regions of Colombia, causing significant monetary losses. Given that Colombia plans 
to improve a large part of the agricultural infrastructure, productivity and competitiveness, it is necessary to improve 
the design and technical approach of agricult ure and livestock, so that new or rehabilitated fields / crops last longer; 
and for farmers and ranchers to avoid and prepare for climatic events. However, the nature of the investments required are of a public nature, for which domestic markets and the pr ivate sector do not play an important role. On 
the other hand, the capital markets in Colombia are not ready  yet to assume the risks of new technologies or 
developments in new places. This is why the GCF plays a critical role in reducing risk to manageable  levels and, 
furthermore, in making the technologies developed by the project more widespread as they are adopted on a larger scale.  
86. Although the pilot experiences show very high returns on investments in CSICAP technologies  (see Annex 23 for 
the ex -post evaluation of the pilots) , there is a large gap in Colombia for these technological options to be adopted 
at scale, and become the norm. Although the farmer groups see the advantages in these investments, they do not 
have the financial capacity to generate the technologies required to improve resilience and reduce the carbon 
footprint, so they need support from the public sector to make these public goods investments. Most of the reasons 
are related to the associated risks and the lack of institutional capac ity to mobilize farmers for the adoption of 
technologies  and practices, both areas where the participation of the GCF can help to change the current  paradigm. 
The project, through its activities, seeks to reduce these associated risks in terms of the adoption of climate- resilient 
and low -carbon technologies and practices.  
87. It is important to note that and in the economic recovery strategy of the Government of Colombia post -COVID 19, 
investments  are being promoted to be resilient and low in carbon, a bet that the Government is making after the 
signing of the peace accords in 2016.  
88. Justification of financial instruments . The proposed financial instruments (loans and grants) were selected f or 
each of the components and activities according to the nature of the investments (whether they are public or private goods), and the financing and co- financing capacity, both of the public sector and from the private sector ( e.g., 
agricultural producer organizations). In this case, there is a balance between loans and grants for each of the 
components, both GCF funds and CAF loan resources. The Government of Colombia, through the decision to take senior loans for these investments in these public goods ( USD 25 million from the GCF and USD 10.3 million from 
the CAF), shows the level of commitment it has with this Project.  Furthermore, the mix of loans and grants is justified 
in the sensitivity analysis included in the Economic and Financial Analysis (Annex  3). 
89. Justification of the level of concessionality . GCF offers a  unique opportunity for blending low interest loans and 
grants, reducing the financial cost of the project, and representing a specialized source of climate financing. The 
project is structured in such a way that there is a minimum of concessionality to make the investments in the 
proposed activities possible with the participation of the private sector and the public sector. As shown in the 
Economic and Financial analysis (Annex 3), the reduction in the concessionality would make the project not viable. 
When reducing the grant amount by only a third, would make the project non- viable for certain gremios (i.e. livestock 
and sugar cane). At reduced levels of grants ( 75% reduction the project is not viable for the majority of the gremios.  
There are no commercial financing sources available in Colombia for the type of investments (gene banks and 
seed improvement, big data, GHG emission measurement, etc.) considered by the project . That is, r eimbursable 
instruments to the producers (instead of grants) are not viable  because these kinds of investments  are usually not 
financed to farmers. Also, around 10 percent of total project costs go to public infrastructure that do not have direct 
revenue generation potential .  Without GCF and CAF support, the government would need to look for another 
unlikely available similar sources of funding. 
The concessionality in this case mainly benefits the producer 
associations, which in turn are willing to provide co- financing so that the project's objectives are met. About a third  
of the project are loans that the Government of Colombia is taking from the GCF (USD 25 million) and CAF (USD 
10.3 million) , as these are mainly investments in public goods . There is a total of USD 16.5 million of direct co-
financing from the farmer groups and CIAT, which represents about 17 percent of the total amount of the project. 
The rest, approximately 48,3  percent of the total project budget is grants. In this case, the grants will benefit direct 
activities with direct beneficiaries in the different  production chains. The level of concessionality of the GCF 
instruments is the minimum required to make the investments viable, with the proposed structure adjusted to the minimum concessionality required for the project to be viable . Please refer to the detailed sensitivity analysis in 
Annex 3  for different levels of concessionality and project viability . 
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability ( max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)


---
*Page 34*
---

B B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 32 OF 75 
 
  90. CAF has a long history of supporting the Government of Colombia and the agricultural sector for the implementation 
of innovative ideas. In this case, the proposed project has been designed in close consultation with the MADR, at 
the national, regional and local levels, as well as with the participation of the farmer groups . These consultations 
and discussions (detailed in Annex 7), combined with the experience of the pilot project and the technologies tested 
in them that are detailed in the Feasibility Study (Annex 2)  and evaluated ex -post (Annex 23), provide the project 
with a solid approach and a set of interventions that they are implemented with strong participation from farmers' 
groups and commitment from local officials. On this basis, the project ensures that investments, as well as the 
results of interventions, are sustained beyond the project period and in the long term through the following elements of project design and implementation.  
91. A key innovative feature of the project is the stre ngthening of the capacities of the gremios , through inclusive and 
participatory approaches. The active participation of these groups in  each of the productive chains in the project 
(Components 1 and 2, and Result  3.1), and the strengthening of agricultural  extension systems ( Results  1.1 and 
3.2), including  the active participation of Agrosavia, they represent changes towards the long- term sustainability 
and replicability of the adaptation and mitigation measures introduced for each production chain. In the case of 
public goods developed by the project (especially in Result  2.1), these will be incorporated into Agrosavia's 
extension systems, as well as each of the farmer associations  within the project. By internalizing these investments, 
Agrosavia will be able to apply those tools and knowledge to other crops beyond the project term.  Moreover, the 
purposively engagement of key stakeholders beyond the agricultural sector such as the f inancial institutions will 
enable achieving benefits by a wider number of beneficiaries beyond the project’s timeline as a mechanism to keep de-risking the agricultural sector as tailored-
made financial mechanisms are developed and scaled by using 
project’ s information.  
92. The longer -term sustainability of the project's investments will be guaranteed through a combination of elements 
and mechanisms that promote the ownership and technical, financial, operational and institutional capacities of the national gov
ernment through the MADR and Agrosavia and the farmer groups to maintain and obtain social, 
economic, and environmental benefits from the proposed investments. In this case, the joint investments of the 
farmer groups will be used for the activities propose d in the installation and operation and maintenance (O&M) of 
the proposed solutions  (an O&M Plan is described in Annex 25). In this way, the project will promote the 
appropriation of the processes that are established and/or strengthened, and will catalyze greater financing from 
the private sector through the farmer associations , to maintain and sustain the products and results beyond the 
project execution period.  
93. The gremios have been an active participant of the project formulation (as described in the An nex 7 of project 
consultations). They have participated in the design of the activities, the resources required to implemented them, 
the time required and the definition of the role of the different stakeholders. In that sense, the gremios know the 
implied investment costs , the O&M of each activity during and after project completion. The current commitment of 
the gremios for project implementation is financial (through cofinancing), and after project completion, they will take 
control and operation of all the tools, techno logies and processes developed under the project. In fact, project 
design foresees that the gremios will take gradual control of all the activities for a smooth transition once the project is completed.  This transition will be supported by the instructiona l strengthening, through local consultants covered 
by the project, which will support the gremios and other local institutions after the project is completed. The 
knowledge and capacity of this locally trained personnel will strengthen the institutions capacity , ensuring the 
sustainability of the project outcomes beyond project completion. Gremios will be responsible of the implementation 
of project activities, and they will implement financial resources (loan and grant) from GCF and CAF, under which 
they w ill sign agreements with their own financial resources (cofinancing).  
94. At the end of the project, the equipment and infrastructure developed by the project will continue to be in the name 
of MADR, but once the project is completed, they will be delivered to the gremios through a contract of bailment 
(contrato de co modato) in which the gremios manage the assets and services (including data platforms) but 
undertake to give it proper use and assume maintenance costs and responsibility (in compliance with national regulations. This mechanism has been used in several projects between MADR and the gremios, including the pilot 
project. A large part of the success of the pilot project lays  in the strengthening of capacities and empowerment of 
the gremios (Fedearroz and Fenalce), which continued and expanded the work carried out with them.


---
*Page 35*
---

C C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 33 OF 75 
   
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) Total amount  Currency  
73.28 million USD ($)   
GCF f inancial instrument  Amount Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  25.00  20 years  5 years 0.75 % 
(ii) Subordinated loans  Enter amount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(iii) Equity  Enter amount    Enter  % equity 
return  
 
(iv) Guarantees  Enter amount  Enter  years    
(v) Reimbursable grants  Enter amount     
(vi) Grants  48.28     
(vii) Result s-base d payments  Enter amount     
(b) Co-financing information  Total amount  Currency  
26.63 million USD ($)  
Name of institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount Currency  Tenor  & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
CAF Senior 
Loans  10.30  million 
USD ($)   20 years  
60 months 
grace period  (Libor + 
1.8)% senior  
CIAT  Grant  4.85 million 
USD ($)      
AGROSAVIA  Grant  2.90 million 
USD ($)     
CIPAV  Grant  0.23 million 
USD ($)     
CIMMYT  Grant  0.80 million 
USD ($)     
FEDEARROZ  Grant  1.99 million 
USD ($)      
FENALCE  Grant  1.07 million 
USD ($)      
FEDEPAPA Grant  1.10 million 
USD ($)      
FEDEPANELA Grant  0.45 million 
USD ($)      
FEDEGAN  Grant  0.28 million 
USD ($)      
ASBAMA / AUGURA 
ASOHOFRUCOL  Grant  1.49 million 
USD ($)      
ASOCAÑA  Grant  1.16 million 
USD ($)      
(c) Total financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount Currency  
99.91 million USD ($)   
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max.  250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page ) Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from 
any type of guarantee (e.g. sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee).  
Please also explain other contributions such as in- kind contributions including  tax 
exemptions and contributions of assets.  
Please also include parallel  financing associated with this project or programme.


---
*Page 36*
---

C C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 34 OF 75 
   
 95. Part of the co -financing of the farmer groups , will be in -kind contributions. 
The farmer associations  are expected to make investments in equipment, 
hire new technicians for the implementation of the program, among other 
investments . In the same way, existing personnel, supplies and other in- kind 
contributions would also be part of the ir cofinancing . 
96. As an international organization established in Colombia, CIAT has a special 
tax-exempt status in that country.  
C.2. Financing by component  
 
97. The project is financed with a mix of financing resources from CAF (Development Bank of Latin America), the 
Government of Colombia, agricultural research institutions (Alianza Bioversity CIAT, CYMMIT and CIPAV), and the 
associations  of agricultural producers in Colombia, and resources, both loan and concessional funds (grants) from 
the GCF. The financing plan of  the Project broken down by source of resources ( loan, grant from the GCF and local 
counterpart) is presented in the following table. The total project amount is USD 99. 91 million, of which USD 7 3.28 
million are GCF funds (USD 25 million in senior loan and USD 4 8.28 million in grant ). CAF contributes to the Project 
with a senior loan of USD 10.3 million The co- financing of the institutions and entities involved in the Project such 
as the Alliance between Bioversity International and CIAT and the farmer groups is USD 16. 3 million.   
98. The Government of Colombia has provided space in its budget for funds for the implementation of the project, through the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR). The Government of Colombia is taking loan 
resources w ith the GCF for USD 25 million for a 20- year term with a 5- year grace period, at a rate of 0.75% and 
with the CAF for a total of USD 10.3 million, a 20-year loan, with a 60-month grace period, at an interest rate of 
LIBOR + 1.8%. The following table shows the detail by component and product of the GCF financing amounts 
(loans and grants), as well as the co- financing of the project. Annex 14 provides details of the loan disbursement 
and payment schedule.  
99. The summary of the project costs for each of the Compo nents and Products, by type of source (GCF or cofinancing) 
and instrument (loan or grant) are presented in the following Table. The detail of the budget is presented in Annex 
4 and its execution schedule is presented in Annex 5.  In Annex 4, the budget prov ides the breakdown  by type of 
expenses . As the CSICAP project will be implemented in 22 departments and 219 municipalities, it requires the 
deployment of local consultants and staff to support the implementation of the project activities. Thus, almost 37 percent of the total budget will go into local consultants  that include personnel in the field (extension services and 
techni cians ) that will work on the field to  provide technical capacity building to local farmers to implement the 
technologies  (on average, 1.7 people in the field to cover each municipality  and support 573 farms ). Local staff 
(such us scientific advisors and scientists), which represent 19 percent of the budget, will develop the local varieties 
and their time dedicated to the project will be tied up to specific products and deliverables that will contribute to the 
results and outcomes of the project. International consultants represent 2 percent of the budget . Local consultants 
represent more than 90 percent of total personnel, with staff representing 3 percent and international consultants 
represent 6 percent ; Construction (10%) and equipment (7%) represent 17 p ercent; services (e.g., field preparation, 
equipment installation, lab analysis, publications, etc.) represent 15 percent of total budget. Finally, training (3%) 
and travel (7%), this last which is almost entirely local travel  for the field work of local c onsultants and staff , represent 
about 10 percent of total costs.  
 
Component  Result  Indicative 
cost 
million USD 
($) GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
million USD 
($) Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
million USD 
($) Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
1. Digital 
agriculture and 
climate services for rural modernization with an emphasis on adaptation 
and mitigation  1.1. 
Strengthenin
g and 
modernizing 
the agricultural extension 
system  with 
an emphasis 
on adaptation and 
mitigation  23.190  9.135  Grants  5.230  Grants  GOC, AB -
CIAT, 
Gremios, CYMMIT y 
CIPAV 
6.250  Senior Loan  2.575 Senior Loan  CAF


---
*Page 37*
---

C C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 35 OF 75 
   
 1.2 
Agroclimatic services in 
place and/ or 
strengthened  16.425  4.410  Grants  3.190  Grants  GOC, AB -
CIAT, 
Gremios, 
CYMMIT y 
CIPAV 
6.250  Senior Loan  2.575 Senior Loan  CAF 
2. Genetic 
improvement, 
crop 
management 
techniques and 
other 
technological options and their scaling -up to 
increase climate resilience and promote low - 
carbon agricultural 
development  2.1. 
Strengthenin
g the 
germplasm 
bank, new 
climate 
resilient varieties 
develop ed 
and their 
seeds 
massive ly 
distributed  23.178 10.345  Grants  4.008  Grants  GOC, AB -
CIAT, 
Gremios, 
CYMMIT y CIPAV 
6.250  Senior Loan  2.575 Senior Loan  CAF 
2.2.  More 
efficient use 
of water resources, 
restoring soil 
properties, and improving 
GHG 
mitigation practices by 
farmers and 
gremios through the adoption of new climate smart practices and 
technologies  24.848 14.517 Grants  2.494 Grants  GOC, AB -
CIAT, 
Gremios, CYMMIT y 
CIPAV 
6.250  Senior Loan  1.586  Senior Loan  CAF 
3. Innovative and 
inclusive 
business models through modernized innovation systems and a more engaged 
financial sector  3.1. 
Improved business models that provide farmers with reasonable profits and improved GHG mitigation 
practices  3.152  2.279 Grants  0.872  Grants  GOC, AB -
CIAT, 
Gremios, 
CYMMIT y 
CIPAV 
0.00 Senior Loan  0.00 Senior Loan  CAF 
3.2. 
Modernized technical assistance and 
agricultural 
extension 
services with 
multi -tool 
strategies, 5.420  4.890 Grants  0.530 Grants  GOC, AB -
CIAT, 
Gremios, 
CYMMIT y 
CIPAV 
0.00 Senior Loan  0.000  Senior Loan  CAF


---
*Page 38*
---

C C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 36 OF 75 
   
 differentiated 
and adapted 
to specific 
environment
al, social, 
gender and 
productive 
contexts at 
the national 
level 
Project 
Management 
Cost   
3.693  2.704  Grants  0.00 Grants  GOC, AB -
CIAT, 
Gremios, CYMMIT y 
CIPAV 
0.00 Senior Loan  0.988  Senior Loan  CAF 
Indicative total cost  (USD)  
99.910 73.283 
25.00 0 Senior Loans  
48.283 Grants  26.627  
10.30 0 Senior Loans  
16.327 Grants  
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer  (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding financ e capacity building activities?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding financ e technology development/transfer?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
 
100. One of the pillars of the project and areas of major focus of the CSICAP project is financing the development 
and transfer of technology. Under Component 1, Product 1.2 of " Information services to reduce agroclimatic risk " 
guaranteeing technical support in the implementation of adaptation and mitigation measures to about 123, 000 of 
these producers. Under Component 2, the generation ( Result  2.1) and the transfer of technologies and sustainable 
management practices in agriculture and livestock ( Result  2.2) will be financed, which will be formulat ed and 
implemented on a large scale; at least 30 new technologies will be developed, validated and implemented and 70 
existing ones will be scaled up. The total amount of GCF funds for technology development and transfer is 6 4.02 
million, of which USD 25.17 million correspond to Component 1 and USD 33.08 million to Component 2.  
101. With regard to training, the project under Component 1, Result  1.1 "Strengthening and modernization of the 
agricultural  extension system aimed at adaptation and mitigation", training and training 2,200 technicians in the 
management of extension tools to modernize and expand the coverage of agricultural extension in Colombia. Under 
Component 3 of “ Innovative and inclusive business models ”, the project expects  to strengthen capacities in at least 
60 entities of the agricultural sector (considering Departmental and Municipal Agriculture Secretaries), 4,400 
technicians and reinforcement of training for 54,000 agricultural producers. The training activities under Component 
3, for USD 5.76 million.


---
*Page 39*
---

D D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 37 OF 75 
   
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the p erformance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page ) 
 
102. It is estimated that the Project will have posi tive impacts on more than 619,691 direct beneficiaries  (producers 
and their families) ,12 along the different gremios  of cattle ranchers and producers of rice, cereals and legumes, 
potatoes, coffee, sugar cane and panel a cane, bananas and plantains. The direct beneficiaries include producers, 
professionals from the farmer associations , and professionals from other entities of the agricultural s ector. The 
production area associated with these direct beneficiaries and that the project would cover is estimated at 967,997 
hectares. The number of indirect beneficiaries is estimated at about 347, 996 during the project execution period,13 
and more than 500,000 during the useful life of the technologies.14 It is important to note that based on the figures 
from the National Agricultural Census of Colombia,15 the direct beneficiaries are equivalent to 7.2 percent of the 
total producers at the national level, while the total indirect beneficiaries would be equivalent to 4.1 percent of total 
producers. Additionally, a total of 10,000 households are estimated to benefit from increased food security.16 As 
previously mentioned, at the geographical level, the project will cover 22 departments (69% of the total departments 
in Colombia) and 219 municipalities (20% of the total municipalities in Colombia). Table D.1.1 summarizes the 
different beneficiaries (producers, professionals from the farmer assoc iations , and professionals from other entities, 
independent and students who will benefit from the Project) under each of the three components.  
 
Table D.1.1. Number of direct beneficiaries by crop and total area (hectares) covered by the project  
Agricultural activity  Component 1. 
Modernization of 
agriculture for 
adaptation  Component 2. New 
technological options 
to increase resilience 
and low carbon  Component 3. 
Innovative and 
inclusive business 
models  Total beneficiari es (a) 
and hectares 
Beneficiaries 392,378  56,149  171,164  (b) 619,691  
Rice 9,114  5,396  11,101  25,612  
Potato  41,623  11,861  46,110  99,594  
Sugar cane  1,137  5,247  2,544  8,928  
Panela cane  22,260  17,150  38,160  77,570  
Dairy farming  25,997  1,526  25,997  53,519  
Livestock  25,997  1,526  25,997  53,519  
Corn  11,384  12,625  19,080  43,089  
Banana  467 817 2,175  3,459  
Coffee  254,400  0 0 254,400  
Area (hect ares) 836,287  131,710   967,997  
(a) The total number of beneficiary producers is the sum of Component 1 and 2; a part of these producers is subject to reinforcement in training in 
Component 3.  
(b) Producers who will be beneficiaries through the strengthening of capacities that were previously attended in component 1 and component 2, for 
which they have already been considered in the total of beneficiaries, so as not to generate double counting.  
 
103. Regarding the mitigation potential, the total emissions that the Project would reduce or avoid throughout its life 
(25 years) will be 34,878, 951 tCO 2e, or 1 ,395,158 per year ( Table D.1.2). Most of this emission reduction 
corresponds to livestock (48%), panela  cane (18%) and bananas (12%). This reduction in emissions is the result 
of direct interventions in 8,750 hectares (rice (1,500 ha), corn (900 ha), panela cane (660 ha), potato (600 ha), 
livestock (3,840 ha) and banana (1,250 ha) ) and reduction of emissions in areas ( 245,368 ha) resulting from farmers 
that only receive trainings and technical assistance as part of  the project intervention. On the other hand, it is 
expected that the reduction of additional indirect emissions that would be influenced by the project through work 
 
12 The direct beneficiaries were estimated based on the agreements made by the farmer associations and the implementing entities , taking 
into account the resources available for the different activities, as well as expected adoption curves of the technologies based on consultations 
with the farmer associations and experts, taking the more conservative figures. The details of the adoption curves for each c rop are present ed 
in the economic analysis (Annex 3).  The total number of producers (194,871) were then multiplied by the average rural household size of 
3.18 people to obtain the total number of direct beneficiaries.  Annex 24 provides further details on these calculations.  
13 Indirect beneficiaries during the project period were based on the adoption curves of the different components, which were constructed with 
parameters of experts participating in the project and/or secondary literature, and the percentage of producers who would use the technologies 
was estimated until the last year of the project. This estimate does not include direct beneficiaries.  See Annex 24 for further details.  
14 The total indirect beneficiari es were estimated based on the adoption curves of the different technologies until their obsolescence, which in 
many cases goes beyond the life of the project. This percentage excludes direct and indirect beneficiaries under the project.   
15 According to the 2014 National Agricultural Census, in Colombia there are 2.7 million producers in the field, and of them 725,000 are 
resident producers, which is equivalent to 26.7% of the total. Of those, 461,000 are men and 264,000 are women.  
16 It is estimated that ar ound 10% of agricultural households (out of a total of 100,000) would benefit from the project.


---
*Page 40*
---

D D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 38 OF 75 
   
 with each of the farmer associations  through agricultural extension services would be 34.9 million tCO 2e, associated 
with a total of 981,471 hectares managed in a sustainable way, mostly from pasture management in livestock, from 
where 83 percent of the reduction of emissions would come.  
 
Table D.1.2. Reduction of direct and indirect greenhouse gas emissions estimated per crop (tCO 2e) and associated 
area (hectares)  
Agricultural activity  Direct emissions 
reductions  (tCO 2e) Area  (hect ares) Indirect emissions 
reductions (tCO 2e) Area (hectares)  
Rice 417,323  38,861  1,505,226  148,724  
Corn  86,495  17,574  282,121  66,696  
Panela cane  708,425  16,671  2,518,508  64,045  
Potato  116,500  6,677  328,706  24,310  
Livestock  7,727,180  170,640 30,075,841  667,200  
Banan a 96,111  3,874 168,549  10,496  
Total  9,152,034  254,118 34,878,951  981,471  
Annual average  366,081   1,395,158  
Source: Own elaboration  based on calculations  in Annex 22.  
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max.  500 words, approximately  1 page)  
 
104. The project seeks to change the current trajectory of agricultural practices and technologies, which, for 
example, have limited investment in innovative proposals such as the use of digital media to disseminate climate 
information, the use of agroclimatic services to offer accurate and timely information to farmers. farmers, as well as 
limitations on investments to develop varieties that are resilient to the climate or with low production of GHG 
emissions and modernize the agricultural extension system so t hat it offers information to farmers so that they can 
adapt their practices and technologies towards more investments. resilient and low carbon. In that sense, the project 
is transformative as it is systematically integrating climate into decision- making processes from the national level 
to the farm level. This project will invest in the implementation of adaptation measures of the agricultural sector in 
prioritized crops and locations in Colombia that will be further expanded throughout the country, as the  different 
sectors begin to replicate the project experience.  
105. Potential for scaling up and replication . MADR and CIAT have already implemented a pilot project that 
includes rice and cotton in some regions of Colombia such as Villavicencio, Yopal, Aguazul, Ibagué, Saldaña, 
Neiva, Aipe, Montería, Espinal, Ciénaga de Oro, Buga, Espinal and Cereté. The project will allow the scaling up 
and replication to other crop regions and cover more products through the mechanisms of agricultural extension 
and inter -institutional collaboration that the project will strengthen and / or establish between the private sector 
farmer associations  involved (Product 1.1), Agrosavia, and CGIAR institutions. and the experiences and lessons 
learned from the project. Specifically, the project would currently cover a total of 22 departments (69% of the 
country's departments) and 219 municipalities (20% of the Colombian municipalities). It is expected that once the 
project is completed, and based on the previous experience of the pilots prior to 2020, the farmer associations , with 
the support of MADR, Agrosavia and CIAT, will continue to expand the adoption of the technologies to other crops 
and municipalities , reducing the risk s for the adoption of these technologies, reducing their costs with increased 
scaling -up and replication of those technologies . For example, due to the level of investment that will be made in 
climate information systems, there will be a greater opportunity  for producers of other crops within the same regions 
to access this information. On the other hand, the extension program will allow the collection of lessons learned 
that can be replicated among peers in other regions of the country and for other crops  to facilitate the adoption of 
technologies and best practices . 
106. Potential for knowledge sharing and learning . The project will generate the necessary knowledge to build 
new agricultural technological capabilities, empowering producers to launch similar proje cts on their own. 
Specifically, Result  3.1 will be in charge of allowing the dissemination, access and use of the project results by the 
key public and private actors to strengthen the capacities that allow influencing future improvements in public policy.  
Management meetings are planned together with national institutions, development of communications with the 
farmer associations  to keep them updated on the progress of the project, presence in social networks and the 
development of communication and knowledge products. CIAT is a good vehicle for knowledge management given 
its solid track record and research capacity, worldwide pres ence and strategic alliances with the productive sector. 
Specifically, the Technical Assistance and Learning Service that will be financed by the Project will be used to 
disseminate successful experiences and show how to participate and take better advanta ge of this financial 
opportunity.  On the other hand, Product 3.2 of the monitoring and evaluation of the project will allow a rigorous 
follow -up and evaluation of the interventions and measure the impact of these on the production and well -being of


---
*Page 41*
---

D D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 39 OF 75 
   
 the far mers, which will allow a better understanding of the success mechanisms for the adoption and use of 
practices and technologies.  
107. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment. This Project is the main initiative of the MADR to 
implement a resilient and low -carbon agriculture as the standard at the sector level of management practices and 
agricultural technologies and to create an enabling environment for the application and expansion of technologies 
at the national level . This will be done  through the farmer’s organizations participating in the different production 
chains and Agrosavia as a strategic partner of the project. As the national (MADR, Agrosavia, etc.) or local 
governments promote the practices and technologies developed and/or improved by the project, the reduction of 
technical, institutional and financial barriers will be facilitated, as well as the perception of the risk of investment in 
such technologies, creating the right environment to expand the application of such technologies. The successful 
development of projects and the evidence of technical, technological and scientific advances under Components 1 
and 2, and disseminated under Result  3.2, will lead to a massive adoption of CSICAP , reducing the perceived 
investment risk and lowering the costs of technologies , learning from experiences and adapting them to real needs 
and conditions. The project will engage with the different stakeholders along the value chain (producers, gremios, 
buyers and other actors such as financial insti tutions, industry, trade associations and service providers) in the co-
design, generation and validation of replicable and successful business models  and an escalation strategy that 
allows the results of the project to be later escalated. The project will leverage additional funds at the national level 
to invest in technology packages, based on the evidence generated by the project. The lessons learned from the 
project have the potential to leverage additional funds internal to the country through the creat ion of practical 
evidence. The strengthening of agroclimatic information will generate an enabling environment for the use and 
application of climate information to be integrated into the productive chains of the different producer associations . 
108. Contributi on to the regulatory framework and policies . As described in more detail in section D.5, the 
project contributes to the implementation of the Comprehensive Plan for Climate Change Management of the 
Agricultural sector (PIGCCS -Agropecuario) of the MADR, which identifies, evaluates and guides the incorporation 
of measures for adaptation to climate change and mitigation of greenhouse gases in the policies and regulations 
of the agricultural sector and is in turn aligned with the strategic line of "rur al development resilient to the climate 
and low in carbon" of the PNCC. Similarly, the project contributes to the Comprehensive Plan for Territorial Climate 
Change Management (PIGCCT), which provides guidelines for the implementation of sectoral adaptation and 
mitigation measures at the territorial level.  
109. Overall contribution to climate -resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national 
climate change adaptation strategies and plans.  The project supports the achievement of the goals under the 
National Development Plan 2018- 2022, in particular those of the “ Pact for Sustainability: produce while conserving 
and conserve by producing ” and the environmental goals of the Regional Pacts; It also contributes to the strategies 
of the National Climate Change Policy, with the achievement of the objectives, strategies and lines of action of the 
Green Growth Policy and with the achievement of  the goals of the National Determined Contribution (NDC). More 
details are presented in section D.5.  
 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
110. Economic co -benefits.  Through  the establishment of improved agricultural technology, incomes are expected 
to increase, especially at the local level, with positive impacts for economic development and poverty reduction. 
Food security will be improved while government investments will be reduced. In addition, the losses avoided will 
mean lower costs to the government and lower insurance premium payments. As productivity increases, farmers 
will have higher incomes, improving livelihoods. The Project can help increase the value of farmers ' activities and 
products through value chains. With capacity development, better -trained farmers will create greater job 
opportunities for them. Increasing returns to labor, returns to capital inputs, and returns to environmental inputs will 
increase sust ainability.  The economic analysis of the project (Annex 3) shows the quantification of the economic


---
*Page 42*
---

D D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 40 OF 75 
   
 benefits of the project for both producers and consumers  as a result of the adoption of technologies that increase 
the productivity and reduce production costs, as well as the economic benefits from reduced CO 2 emissions .  
111. On the other hand, in the cost -benefit analysis of the project (see section D.6), additional expected results that 
were not considered in the analysis include:  
• Economic value of GHG emission reductions derived from the adoption of technologies proposed by CSICAP, 
promoting sustainable and green development, and reducing the need to expand the agricultural frontier due 
to increased productivity.  
• Increase in the diversity of new crops and development of improved crops promoting food security, within 
Colombia and worldwide.  
• Improvement in the planning of the agricultural sector to avoid that the impacts of climatic events affect the final 
price structure and, at the same time, create climate- resilient value chains.  
• Greater efficiency in public -private action, by strengthening alliances for the creation of public goods.  
• Support to three of the priority regions of the NDC for adaptation measures (Caribbean, Andean and Orinoquia 
regions) and to the strategic lines of work outlined by Colombian adaptation policies.  
112. Social Co-benefi ts. The project will positively influence the food security situation by increasing the availability 
of food, improving access and its quality. In the event of natural disasters, the affected regions will be less vulnerable 
and can guarantee food supplies. As the population becomes less vulnerable to climate change and extreme 
weather events, health and safety will increase. Social inclusion will be sought, with emphasis on strengthening the 
role of women in the adoption of new cultural approaches, and greater youth participation will be sought. Cultural 
practices will be combined with new technologies.  
113. Environmental Co-benefi ts. In addition to the environmental problems associated with the expansion of the 
agricultural frontier, other problems such as the use of chemical products, deforestation, fires, conventional tillage, 
the use of heavy machinery and intensive irrigation have caused that 40% of the territory present some degree of 
erosion. Thus, 2.9% of the country's surface is in a severe and very severe degree of erosion, and moderate erosion 
extends over 16.8% of the territory, while slight erosion is observed in 20% (DNP, 2015b). CFCA is essential for 
the implementation of measures that reduce the vulnerability of production systems to weather -related events, since 
their production systems are characterized by “being diversified, using a greater number of varieties (including 
native or autochthonous), making less use of chemical inputs and apply soil and water conservation practices” 
(MADR and ADR, 20 17). In addition, “the adoption of sustainable technologies contributes to increasing its 
productivity, while reducing production costs, with which sustainability and competitiveness go hand in hand” 
(MADR and ADR, 2017).  
114. Gender sensitive development impact . In Colombia, 5.3 million women inhabit the Colombian countryside 
and play a central role in agricultural production, food security and resilience in communities to climate change 
(IDEAM, PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA, 2017 ). 27.8% of rural households are headed by women, and 36.6% 
of the country's agricultural production is in the hands of women. In addition, they lead a large part of community 
life, weave social relations and build reconciliation and peace in their territories (FAO et al., 2018). However, 
structural gaps still persist that, if not addressed, could be a barrier to the implementation of adaptation and 
mitigation measures in the sect or. The project, through its Gender Action Plan, seeks to reduce the barriers faced 
by women producers who participate in the Project and will take advantage to identify opportunities, in an articulated 
manner between different actors, to favor a greater participation of rural women in local development.  
 
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
115. Vulnerability of Colombia and the beneficiary groups . Poverty levels are higher in rural areas of the country. 
In 2017, the multidimensional poverty index in the populated and dispersed rural centers was 3.2 times higher than 
that of the municipal capitals (36.6% vs. 11.4%). The proportion of the population below the poverty line is also 
higher in dispersed rural areas (36%) than in the capital cities (24.2%) ( DANE, 2018 , p. 45), all of which reveals the 
persistence of important gaps between the country and the city. Many of these departments are characterized by 
high levels of rural poverty and small farmer systems.  
116. Level of economic and social development . A challenge for the agricultural sector in social matters is 
productive inclusion, since the average level of income per worker of the dispersed population is barely a third of 
the legal minimum wage. Also noteworthy is the high- income inequality between residents of populated centers 
and those in dispersed rural areas, evidenced by a Gini coefficient of 0.456 ( DNP, 2015 ). Within the agricultural 
sector, the role played by peasant, family and community agriculture (CFCA) stands out as it is responsible for 70% 
of the food t hat is destined for local markets in Colombia. The Third National Agricultural Census shows that 75% 
of the production units are in the hands of peasants, employing 57% of the sector's workforce (FAO et al., 2018). 
Compared to other agricultural schemes, t he CFCA is characterized by allocating a greater amount of its production 
for self -consumption, as well as by its greater participation in community associations, greater use of traditional and


---
*Page 43*
---

D D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 41 OF 75 
   
 uncertified seeds, less access to machinery and less use of sy stems. irrigation and chemical synthe tical fertilizers 
(MADR and ADR, 2017).  
117. Absence of alternative sources of financing . As mentioned in section B.5, the nature of the initial 
investments that are required are of a public nature, so that domestic markets and the private sector in Colombia 
do not play an important role in that  stage. On the other hand, despite the fact that the farmer associations  see the 
advantages in investments, they do not have the financial capacity to generate the required tec hnologies. That is 
why interventions are required to reduce the risk of investment in these technologies  and in this case, it is the 
Government of Colombia that is borrowing to achieve this change. In this case, the Government of Colombia seeks 
a minimum l evel of concessionality, in the absence of alternative sources of financing that allow reducing risk to 
more acceptable levels that catalyze investments by the private sector.  
118. Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity.  There is a need to strengthen institutions 
at the national and local level (Agrosavia, farmer associations , etc.) for scaling up practices and technologies that 
are resilient to climate change and low in carbon, while at the same time strengthening the implementation capacity 
of these institutions in those technologies. In this case, and as seen in the barrier  analysis (section B.2) u nder the 
three project components, especially under Result  3.1, the institutional capacities of various actors in the agricultural 
sector will be strengthened.  The focus on instructional strengthening is reflected in the budget, where 37 percent 
of the budget is dedicated to local consultants and 19  percent to local staff, which will be part of the project during 
its implementation and will support the gremios and other local institutions after the project is completed. In a sense, 
these personnel, along with their gremios and institutions, become project beneficiaries, as their knowledge and 
capacity will strengthen the institutions that they work with, ensuring the sustainability of the project outcomes 
beyond project completion.  
 
D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
119. Alignment with policies and strategies at the national and sectoral level . The project is included in the 
GCF Country Program  and is aligned with the 2018- 2022 National Development Plan  "Pact for Colombia, Pact 
for Equity", in its goal for Agriculture and Rural Development to increase the area with prioritized agricultural 
production systems that implement initiatives for adaptation to climate change. Objective 5 of the Pact for 
Entrepre neurship and Productivity  aims to encourage investment in the field through the reform of the 
instruments of the National Agricultural Credit System and the management of market and climate risks, with 
strategies such as implementation of the Policy for the Comprehensive Management of Agricultural Risks and the 
Information System for the Management of Agricultural Risks. The project is aligned with the Pact for 
Sustainability "producing conserving and conserving producing"  that seeks a balance between the 
conservation of natural resources and production, and which has proposed actions on the efficient use of water, 
materials, energy and soil. It also promotes the development of the circular economy, through innovation and the 
adoption of new technologies, and encouraging the control of deforestation and ecosystems degradation. Strategic 
interventions are also identified to prevent and reduce disaster risk and achieve adaptation to climate change, for 
which it proposes productive activities committed to sustai nability and mitigation of climate change.  
120. Likewise, it is aligned with the various climate change plans and strategies such as the National Determined 
Contribution (NDC) and its 2020  update under the emission reduction goals in the agriculture, forestry and other 
land use sectors and associated actions under the nationally appropriate mitigation actions  (NAMA ) for sustainable 
cattle farming, the Coffee NAMA, the comprehensive strategy of the panel a subsector, the reduction of emissions 
in rice production, and the implementation of innovative adaptation actions in agriculture; the National Policy on 
Climate Chan ge (PNCC)  and the strategic line of “low -carbon and climate- resilient rural development”; With the 
National Plan for Adaptation to Climate Change (PNACC), and the prioritized actions of “agricultural production 
and food security adapted to climate change”,  which among others include: i) Identification of crops that will be 
affected by temperature change and precipitation, as well as by floods, coastal and continental erosion, saline 
intrusion, drought and other effects of climate change and climate variabil ity; ii) Train and disseminate new 
cultivation and irrigation technologies to small and large producers with tolerance to changes associated with 
climate change; iii) Investigate technology and innovation for climate- smart agriculture; iv) Recover producti ve 
systems of traditional knowledge that tend to maintain and/or increase resilience in the face of climate change. 
Similarly, it is aligned with the Green Growth Policy  (2019 ), under the objective  of strengthening the mechanisms 
and instruments to optimize the use of natural resources and energy in production and consumption;  and with the 
Colombian Strategy for Low Carbon Development (ECDBC ), which includes as objectives: i) Empower and 
motivate the sectors to m ake decisions that reduce their emissions in the future, achieving at the same time their 
growth goals and generating social benefits. , economic and environmental; ii) Develop mitigation action plans in


---
*Page 44*
---

D D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 42 OF 75 
   
 each productive sector of the country with an impact  on GHG emissions, as well as NAMA and emblematic 
mitigation projects in each sector.  
121. The project is aligned with the instruments that allow the development of policies at the sectoral and territorial 
level, such as the Comprehensive Plan for Sectoral Clim ate Change Management of the Agricultural sector 
(PIGCCS -Agropecuario), and the Comprehensive Plan for Territorial Climate Change Management 
(PIGCCT) , which provide guidelines for the implementation of sectoral adaptation and mitigation measures at the 
territorial level. The PIGCCS -Agropecuario identifies, evaluates and guides the incorporation of greenhouse gas 
mitigation measures and adaptation to climate change in the policies and regulations of the sector and is aligned 
in turn with the strategic line of "rural development resilient to climate and low in carbon”  of the PNCC.  
122. The project is aligned with the Mission for the Transformation of the Countryside  that proposed a set of 
State policies to “promote integral development (economic, social and environmental) in the Colombian countryside, 
built from the territory and with a view of the rural area more beyond agriculture”, including three strategies on 
productive inclusion and family farming, agricultural competitiveness and environmental sustainability. The Mission 
mentions that investment in science and technology has not found adequate solutions to the impacts of phenomena 
that affect rural areas to a greater degree, such as those associated with climate change, and seeks to plan long-
term agricultural investments in crops in order to maintain and raise productivity. Similarly, there is alignment with 
the Green Growth Mission , whose purpose was to define the inputs and guidelines to guide the development of 
the country towards the year 2030 and which was adopted in 2018. Additionally, the strategy “Forests Territories 
of Life -  Comprehensive Strategy Deforestation Control and Forest Management”  with the purpose of curbing 
deforestation and forest degradation.  
123. At the sectoral level, the project is aligned with the Sectoral Action Plan (PAS) for the Mitigation of 
Greenhouse Gases (MADR, 2014) and its three strategic lines: implementation and sustainable intensification, 
innovation and development, and incentives and financial instruments. Likewise, the project is aligned with the 
Strategy for the adaptation of the agricultural sector to climatic phenomena , whose objective is to reduce the 
vulnerability of agricultural production to climatic threats to minimize their impacts on the competitiveness of the 
sector and to have sufficient and stable availability of quality food by strengthening climate risk management (DNP 
and MADR, 2014). The st rategy addresses three programmatic axes: i) strengthen the country's capacity to manage 
agroclimatic information; ii) adapt the productive systems of the agricultural, fishing and forestry sectors to climatic 
phenomena; and strengthen the institutions of the agricultural, fishing and forestry sector in their actions related to 
adaptation to climate change.  
124. Finally, the project is aligned with the National Agricultural Innovation System (SNIA), the Strategic Plan for 
Agricultural Science, Technology and Innovation (PECTIA), the National Seed Plan (PNS), the National Policy for 
Disaster Risk Management and the National Disaster Risk Management System, the National Policy for Sustainable 
Land Management (PNGSS) (MADS, 2016), the National Policy for the Comprehensive Management of Water 
Resources (2010- 2022), and the Zoning Statute of Adequate Use of the Territory (EZUAT).  
125. Implementation capacity of Executing Entity . The MADR will select through the direct contracting modality, 
in accordance with literal e) of n umeral 4 of article 2 of Law 1150 of 2007, in accordance with article 2.2.1.2.1.4.7 
of Decree 1082 of 2015, articles 2 and 17 of Decree - Law 591 of 1991, article 33 of Law 1286 of 2009, to an 
institution as the main procured party  that will be in charge of the operational, technical and administrative execution 
of the project. Prior to this process, a detailed profile will be structured that the entity to be selected must comply 
with, and that will be in accordance with the technical and administrative competencies required by the operational 
implementation of the MADR. The MADR foresees the signing of a technical and scientific cooperation agreement 
with the entity that will act as the main procured party  to formalize the relationship and regulate the administration 
processes, execution mechanisms and transfer of resources between both institutions. Once the selection process 
has been completed, the entity that assumes as the main procured party will carry out the contracts with the different 
entiti es that participate in the execution of the technical activities, this will be done through an evaluation process 
and through Derivative Agreements, both framework and derivative agreements will have the specific conditions or 
guidelines required by Colombian regulations , CAF, and in consequence, GCF.  
126. On a preliminary basis, the Consortium of International Agricultural Research Centers (CGIAR), through CIAT, 
has been identified as the main procured party for the Project. The GCIAR is an international entity  based in France 
that operates worldwide and is one of the accredited entities  to the GCF. The CGIAR includes  a network of 
international research centers such as CIAT, the Center for the Improvement of Corn and Wheat (CYMMIT), among 
others. CIAT is an agricultural research institution that was formally established in 1967, and has strong 
relationships with national research programs in Colombia in different crops with gremios  such as FEDEARROZ, 
FENALCE, FEDEGAN, CENICAÑA, ASBAMA, AGROSAVIA, CIPAV, and joint works with CGIAR international 
research centers such as CIMMYT. On December 31, 2012, MADR and CIAT signed A greement N ° 20120382 by 
means of which they established  that they will work together with the objective of “joining efforts, resources and 
capacities to strengthen the adaptation capacity of the agricultural sector to variability and climate change and 
improve the efficiency of the use of resources in the productive systems in prioritized regions, in accordance with 
those Science Technology and Innovation (STI) instruments available to the parties ”.


---
*Page 45*
---

D D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 43 OF 75 
   
 127. Role of National Designated Authority  (NDA) . In Colombia, the National Planning Department (DNP) is the 
Designated National Authority (NDA), which supports its decision- making in a Collegiate Body made up of the 
Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development (MADS), the Ministry of Finance and Publ ic Credit (MHCP), 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MRE), the Presidential Agency for International Cooperation and the DNP, which 
exercises the Technical Secretariat of the Collegiate Body. The Collegiate Body is an instance whose objective is 
to promote t he mobilization of financing resources from the GCF in accordance with its result areas, generating the 
tools and mechanisms that support the analysis and decision- making of the NDA. In this case, the Project has 
undergone a review by the Collegiate Body and has incorporated the comments provided. This process has verified 
the alignment of the Project to the goals of the National Development Plan 2018- 2022, the contribution to the 
strategies and goals of the National Climate Change Policy, the Green Growth Policy, and the Predicted and 
Determined Contribution at the national level. (NDC), as well as coverage at the municipal level (project scale), and 
other criteria aligned with the investment criteria of the GCF.  
128. Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders, including indigenous 
peoples, women and other vulnerable groups . During project development, consultations were held with various 
groups, including male and female producers, farmer associations officials, extension workers , ethnic groups, local 
and national institutional actors. A total of 24 group work sessions were held with 86 officials from 14 national 
institutions directly linked to the issue of adaptation and mitigation of climate change in the agricultural  sector and  
the participation of 39 CGIAR experts on different crops and topics. These sessions were complemented with 
multiple bilateral working sessions to discuss specialized topics related to climate challenges and the technologies 
to face them. Additionally, for  the analysis of Environmental and Social Safeguards and Gender Analysis, 52 
consultations and group sessions were held with extension agents, producers, ethnic groups and institutional actors 
at the territorial and national level on perceptions and recommendations for the implementation of the project, 
reaching a participation of 205 people, 131 men and 74 women, who were asked for recommendations to guarantee 
success in including the gender approach in the project, among other aspects. The details of the recommendations 
are found in section G.2 and in Annex 8. Under the Gender Action Plan, the project will implement several of the 
actions that will be implemented with the direct beneficiaries (women producers), but also with indirect ones (for 
example, fro m producers' households) in order to promote greater participation of rural women in the project. The 
summary of the history of consultations that were carried out to develop the project is in Annex 7.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
129. Financial Structure. As mentioned in section B.5, the project proposes a combination of loans (assumed by 
the Government of Colombia) for an amount of USD 35.3 million. On the other hand, the local counterpart amounts 
to USD 16.56 million of direct co- financing from farmer ass ociations  and other institutions in Colombia. This means 
that 48.3 % of the total amount of the project are grants, minimizing the concessionality of the GCF funds. GCF 
financing and its financial instruments including grants, combined with CAF funds, reduc es the cost of loans for this 
Project. On the other hand, it is expected that with the Project, and in addition to the co- financing of the farmer 
associations of the various production chains, additional investments will be made (not counted as co- financin g) by 
the private sector, once there is a greater adoption of the practices and technologies developed and validated by 
the project.  
130. Efficiency and effectiveness. The ex -ante economic analysis for the implementation of the CSICAP project 
considers eight agricultural activities: livestock (milk, beef), sugar cane, sugar cane, coffee, corn, rice and potatoes. 
The economic benefits of the project for society (producers and consumers) are analyzed due to the increase in 
production performance, the reduction of losses and the reduction of production costs as a result of: (i) adoption of 
technologies for management agroclimatic risk and digital agriculture, (ii) genetic improvement and (iii) efficient use 
of water resources. This analysis considers incremental benefits over 25 years, which is the useful life of the 
technologies considered. This evaluation considered the most probable scenario of technological impact and two 
opposite scenarios (maximum and minimum) of technology adoption by producers, as well as the probability of 
success in the implementation.  
131. The results in Annex 3 show an average IRR of 201%, which results from the high impact of making climate 
smart technologies available at scale for producers and generating high returns at the producer level. It is worth 
noting that despite this high rate of return in the targeted value chains. In this case, despite the high level of IRRs, 
reimbursable instruments to the producers (instead of grants) are not viable because the kind of investments are 
usually not financed to farmers  (as most of them are public goods) . That is, there are no commercial financing 
sources  available in Colombia for the type of investments (gene banks and seed improvement, big data, GHG 
emission measurement, etc.) considered by the project . Since the project represents a public good investment , as 
around 10 percent of total project costs go to public infrastructure that do not have direct revenue generation 
potential , without GCF and CAF support, the government would need to look for another unlikely available similar 
sources of funding. GCF of fers a unique opportunity for blending low interest loans and grants, reducing the financial 
cost of the project, and representing a specialized source, especially designed to enhance climate resilience and


---
*Page 46*
---

D D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 44 OF 75 
   
 mitigate GHG emissions. As the sensitivity analys is shows (Table 6 in Annex 3 ), the project is not feasible if the 
grant share is reduced by 75%. A 35% grant reduction will make the project unprofitable for two producer 
associations (Fedegan and Asocaña- Cenicaña) and technically unfeasible given the importance of livestock in GHG 
emission reductions . Reducing the grant will cause many activities not to be completed or even undertaken, 
affecting the expected productivity increase, cost reduction, and technology adoption rate, undermining the overall 
projec t´s success probability.  
132. Annex 3 also provides a more realistic economic evaluation, where we have used the modified IRR (Marin -
Salazar, et al. 2019) , which takes into account the actual reinvestment rate (usually lower than the regular IRR´s). 
As a result , the revised overall project’s modified internal rate of return (MIRR), considering a return of 12% and a 
real interest rate of 3.5%, is 24%, which  still attractive enough to justify the public investments . For each crop, 
depending on the technologies and the level of adoption (between 10% and 37%), the MIRR  varies between 1 7% 
and 29%. For most of the crops considered, the MIRR values are above 14%, which is the average rate for 
agriculture projects in Latin America and the Caribbean. The net present value (NPV) of the investments for the 
eight agricultural sectors would be around USD 3.3 billion under a conservative scenario of technology adoption. 
These results show that the application of concrete measures, within the reach of producers and easily implemented 
to promote the closing of productive gaps, will increase the competitiveness of the agricultural sector, having 
tangible benefits in terms of economic returns from these investments. The benefit -cost ratio (BCR) of the 
technologies is 103 for the project, varying between crops between 17.6 and 219.5, depending on the level of 
adoption of the technologies (see detailed table in Annex 3).  
133. Best available technologies and practices. The project will make use of best practices and innovative 
technologies that have been previously tested and that have been validated in the reality of the Colombian 
agricultural sector. Specifically, and as described in section B.3, a Big Data platform will be developed and operated 
for the supply of analyzed and processed information and the empowerment of the farmer associations  to achieve 
the delivery of recommendations for adaptation and mitigation measures. to producers in a reliable, timely and site-
specific manner, resulting in agility and lower cost for the provision of the agricultural extension service (Product 
1.1). The design and implementation of early warning platforms, the generation of climate predictions, the use of 
simulation models and Big Data information, will provide accurate and timely information to farmers ( Result  1.2). 
Under Component 2 of genetic improvement, crop management techniques and other technological options and 
their scaling, new vari eties tolerant or resistant to water deficit, waterlogging and diseases will be used, developed 
and validated and seeds adapted to these conditions will be multiplied in a massive way (Product 2.1). Under Result  
2.2, sustainable management practices will b e formulated and implemented on a large scale, including the 
incorporation of agroforestry arrangements, rational management of fertilizers and the use of bioproducts, 
optimization of irrigation systems, conservation agriculture, and use of waste. harvesti ng, low -emission planting 
materials, conservation and restoration of strategic areas at the landscape level, optimization of processing 
systems, and water harvesting. In livestock farming, grassland management, animal welfare, and good livestock 
practices will also be worked on.


---
*Page 47*
---

E E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 45 OF 75 
   
 
 LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project /programme ’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance 
Measurement Framework s under the Results Management Framework  to which the project/programme contributes  
as a whole, including in respect of any  co-financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives  
Please  select  the appropriated expected result. For cross -cutting proposals, tick both.  
☒ Shift to low -emission sustainable development pathways  
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development  
  
 
17 It is important to note that approximately 13% of the GCF contribution is considered within the mitigation results area (see section A4 ), 
around USD 9,526,800. If we account only for this funding to estimate the GCF cost per t CO 2eq, the cost is USD 1.04 per t CO 2eq (USD 
9,526,800 / 9,152,034 t CO 2 eq = 1.04 USD / t CO 2eq). 
18 See section D1 and Annex 24 for further details regarding the calculations and assumptions for direct and indirect beneficiar ies. E.2. C ore indicator  targets 
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project /programme . 
Methodologies for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in 
section A.  
E.2.1. Expected ton nes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided  (mitigation 
and cross -cutting  only)  Annual  366,081 t CO 2 eq 
Lifetime  9,152,034 t CO 2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO 2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lif etime emission 
reductions ( mitigation and cross -
cutting only)  (a) Total project  financing  99,910,201    USD     
(b) Requested GCF amount  73,283,080   USD  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions    9,152,034   t CO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t  CO 2eq (d = a / c)  10.9   USD  / t CO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t  CO 2eq removed  
(e = b / c)  8.01   USD  / t CO 2eq17 
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme as a 
result of  the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources ( mitigation  and 
cross- cutting only)  (f) Total finance leveraged   26,627,121   USD  
(g) Public source co -financed  10,300,000   USD  
(h) Private source finance leveraged  16,327,121   USD  
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b ) 0.36   
(j) Public source co -financing ratio (j = g / b)  0.14  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b)  0.22  
 
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex ) 18 Direct  619,691 
20% of female  
Indirect  347,996 
20% of female  
 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct  1.21% (Expressed as %) of total population in Colombia 
(51,273,917 people)  
Indirect  0.68% (Expressed as %) of total population in Colombia 
(51,273,917  people )


---
*Page 48*
---

E E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46 OF 75 
   
 E.3. Fund -level impacts  
Select the appropriate impact(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select  key result areas and  corresponding  
indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected 
impact result. The result areas indicated in this section should match those selected in s ection A.4 above.  Add rows 
as needed.  
Expected Result s Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-
term  Final  
M4.0 Reduced emissions 
from land use, 
reforestation, reduced 
deforestation, and through 
sustainable forest 
management and 
conservation and enhancement of forest 
carbon stocks  M4.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO2 
eq) reduced or avoided 
(including increased removals) - forest and land 
use Measurement of 
emissions in the field 
and estimation of 
emissions according 
to the area of improved crops and 
livestock . 
National GHG 
inventories for agriculture in 
Colombia (if 
available for the 
targeted value chains ). 0 
No project 
interventio
ns 98,961 498,190 Farmers adopt 
technological packages 
and best practices in 
crop and livestock 
management .  
 
Detailed assumptions 
regarding the 
calculations are included 
in Annex 22, including:  
- Project lifetime: 25 
years  
- Annual emission 
reductions : 366,081 t 
CO
2 eq 
- Lifetime emission 
reductions : 9,152,034 t 
CO 2 eq 
A1.0 Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods 
of the most v ulnerable 
people, communities and 
regions  A1.2 Number of males and 
females benefiting from the 
adoption of diversified, 
climate resilient livelihood options (including fisheries, 
agriculture, tourism, etc.)  Monitoring platform, field surveys, data 
collection.  
Secondary data: 
annual datasets of 
some producer’s associations; i) Rice: 
ENAM; ii) Fenalce,
19 
iii) Coffee Federation 
datasets  (annual 
stats) ; iv) 
Fedepanela.  0 
No project 
beneficiari
es 16,200 
(80% 
male, 
20% 
female)  54,000
20 
(80% 
male, 
20% 
female)  The capacities created 
in the farmer 
associations are 
maintained and renewed 
periodically and catalyze a better management of 
climate risks.  
Support structures / 
services for the 
implementation of best 
agricultural practices are 
available and trained.  
The male and female 
breakdown is based on 
the previous 
experiences where only 
5.4% of producers were female heads of 
household.  
A2.0 Increased resilience 
of health and well -being, 
and food and water 
security  A2.2 Number of food 
secure households (in 
areas/periods at risk of 
climate change impacts)  Monitoring platform, 
field surveys, data 
collection . 1,113,514
22 secure 
household
s in the 
rural 1,115,5
14 
secure 
househ
olds 1,123,514 
secure 
househ
olds Farmers implement technology packages 
managing to be 
prepared for any 
adverse weather event 
 
19 ENAM is the National Mechanized Rice Survey (ENAM for its acronym in Spanish) carried out by FEDEARROZ and the National 
Administrative Department of Statistics (DANE for its acronym in Spanish) twice a year, sample size around 700-  800 producers. FENALCE 
sample size around 700- 800–  annual. FEDEPANELA sample size around 400- 500 farmers  
20 To estimate the 54,000 people, we used number of direct beneficiaries (just producers, not family members), multiplied by the adoption 
rates from the ex -ante evaluation (see Annex 23)  and other studies which indicate the average level of agricultural technology adoption is 
28%. In this case, we only count those producers that actually adopt the technologies and practices and benefit from them.  
22 The households are calculated based on the rural population divided by the average size of people per household (3.1) and the percentage 
of people with food insecurity in Colombia (ENSIN, 2015)


---
*Page 49*
---

E E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47 OF 75 
   
 Secondary source: 
National Budge t of 
Household 
expenses  (ENPH)21-
DANE . departmen
ts where 
project 
interventio
ns will be 
carried out. 
(23.8% 
household led by 
women)  (23.8% 
househ
old led 
by 
women.  
This 
implies 
2,000 
househ
olds in 
food 
security
) (23.8% 
househ
old led. 
This 
implies 
at the end of 
the 
project 10,000 
househ
olds in 
food 
security
) that may affect their 
production and thus 
increase their probability 
of achieving food 
security.  
Food security is the safe 
and permanent access 
of the members of a 
household to sufficient food in quantity and 
quality, for a healthy and 
active life. FAO.  Escala 
Latinoamericana y Caribeña de Seguridad 
Alimentaria (ELCSA): 
Manual de Uso y Aplicaciones. 2012 
Social, environmental,  
economic co- benefit  Social, environmental,  
economic co- benefit 
index/indicator at the 
impact level  
Percentage increase in 
household income from 
agricultural activities  Baseline, 
intermediate and 
final surveys  
Secondary source: National Budge t of 
Household 
expenses  (ENPH)  -
DANE . Average net 
income  
(USD per 
hectare ):
23 
Rice: 356 
Sugarcane
: 73 
Bananas: 1,911 
Coffee: 
757 
Livestock 
(meat): 127 
Livestock 
(milk): 21  
Corn: 407 
Panela 
Cane: 312 
Potato: 
629 4.4%  14.6%
24 Farmers, aware of the risks of climate 
variability and change, 
adopt technologies that 
make them more 
resilient to any adverse event while increasing 
their productivity and 
being able to sell more, 
which leads to an 
increase in household 
income generated by 
agricultural activities.  
Baseline values were 
calculated from average 
yield and price data for 
each crop 
 
21 Survey that provides information on the structure of spending and household income that allows establishing consumption patterns of the 
inhabitants of Colombia, in which adequate food consumption indices can be constructed. Survey conducted every 10 years. Next survey 
2026.  
23 Estimated based on average yield (ton/ha), price (Colombian pesos /Ton), exchange rate with USD and cost per hectare.  
24 Percentage change is based on average observed value from the ex -post analysis of previous interventions (see Annex 23).  E.4. Fund -level  outcomes  
Select the appropriate outcome (s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select  key expected outcomes  and 
corresponding indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be 
selected per expected outcome . Add rows as needed.  
Expected Outcomes  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term)  Final


---
*Page 50*
---

E E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48 OF 75 
   
  
25 ENAM is the National Mechanized Rice Survey (ENAM for its acronym in Spanish) carried out by FEDEARROZ and the National 
Administrative Department of Statistics (DANE for its acronym in Spanish) twice a year.  
26 AMTEC is the Mass Adoption of Technology designed and conceived by the National Rice Fund (FEDEARROZ for its acronym i n Spanish) 
to disseminate and transfer best -management practices for rice producers to increase yield and reduce cost of production (Ramirez and 
Bedoya, 2019).  M9.0 Improved 
management of land 
or forest areas 
contributing to 
emissions reductions  M9.1 Hectares of land or 
forests under improved and 
effective management that 
contributes to CO2 
emission reductions   Primary data: 
Monitoring 
platform, field 
surveys, data 
collection  
Secondary data: 
annual datasets of 
some producer’s 
associations; i) 
Rice: ENAM25; ii) 
Cattle: datasets 
from FEDEGAN ; 
iii) Coffee 
Federation 
datasets; iv) 
RENARE: 
datasets from 
national platform 
of GHG reduction 
projects.  55,263 ha  
(It is 
equivalent 
to hectares 
under 
silvopastora
l systems in 
cattle 
(38,390 ha) 
and 
hectares 
under the 
AMTEC 
2.026 
system for 
rice (16,873 
ha) of the 
department
s where the 
project 
intervention
s will be 
carried out)  57,373 ha.  
 
This 
implies 
2,119 ha 
(full invest) 
under 
sustainabl
e 
managem
ent 
practices 
following 
the 
guidelines 
of the 
project   
Rice: 363 
ha 
Corn: 218 
ha 
Panela: 
160 ha 
Potato: 
145 ha 
Livestock:
929 ha 
Plantain: 
303 ha 64,013 ha 
This implies 
8,750 ha (full 
invest) under 
sustainable 
management 
practices 
following the 
guidelines of 
the project : 
Rice: 1500 ha  
Corn: 900 ha  
Panela: 660 
ha 
Potato: 600 ha  
Livestock:3 ,84
0 ha 
Plantain: 
1,250 ha Farmers adopt 
technological 
packages and best 
practices in crop and 
livestock 
management that 
contribute to the 
reduction of CO 2 
emissions  
Description of 
assumptions for 
calculations are 
include in Annex 22, 
and in section D1.  
Means of verification 
are described in 
Annex 11.  
A6.0 Increased 
generation and use of 
climate information in 
decision- making  A6.1 Use of climate 
information 
products/services in 
decision- making in climate 
sensitive sectors   Primary data: 
Surveys  and 
training activities 
to technicians.  
Secondary data: 
Producers 
associations’ 
reports about the 
use of their 
platforms.  Annual 
agriculture 
sector plans 
by gremios 
are updated 
using data 
on the 
meteorologi
cal and 
early 
warning 
systems, 
and 
relevant 
sectoral 
and 
extension 
officers are 
trained in 
the 
interpretatio
n of 
agroclimatic 
forecast, 
leading to a 
reduct ion of 
losses in Annual 
agriculture 
sector 
plans by 
gremios 
are 
updated 
using data 
on the 
meteorolo
gical and 
early 
warning 
systems, 
and 
relevant 
sectoral 
and 
extension 
officers 
are trained 
in the 
interpretati
on of 
agroclimati
c forecast, 
leading to Annual 
agriculture 
sector plans 
by gremios 
are updated 
using data on 
the 
meteorological 
and early 
warning 
systems, and 
relevant  
sectoral and 
extension 
officers are 
trained in the 
interpretation 
of agroclimatic 
forecast, 
leading to a 
reduction of 
losses in 
agricultural 
production 
amounting to 
USD 
300,000/year . Climate information 
products and services 
are developed and 
adopted by t he 
gremios to train 
extension technicians 
on time to provide 
information to farmers 
in the field. They use 
the technology 
designed to reduce 
possible losses due to 
climatic factors and 
make them more 
resilient.  
This assumes that 
gremios already have 
climat e services 
improve their capacity 
regarding climate 
services, and those 
gremios that do not 
have systems  in 
place, improve their 
stance compared to 
the baseline


---
*Page 51*
---

E E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49 OF 75 
   
  
27 Through the ex -post impact evaluation, we quantified and understood the effects of the activi ties carried out within the technical agreement 
framework since 2013. These activities focused mainly on rice and maize. The analysis was based, on primary information colle cted in the 
field using face -to-face surveys made to producers of the two crops. The survey instruments used allowed us to describe different dimensions 
of the producers, like household composition, production decision- making, agronomic management, information- technical assistance, 
exposure to adverse weather events, adoption of resilient practices, living conditions, among others. The results of the ex -post impact 
evaluation showed that there are heterogeneous effects by type of crop and intervention. For more details see Annex 23 and Gallego, J., 
Wiesner, D., Jerez, K., Betancourth, A.,  Ortega, J., Bateman, A., González, C., Andrade, R., Ibarra, L., Álvarez, A. and Cubillos, N. (2021). 
Intervenciones en Colombia -  Cambio Climático: Evaluación de Impacto Informe final - resultados y recomendaciones. (Interventions in 
Colombia – Climate Ch ange: Impact Evaluation Final Report –  Results and Recommendations). Unpublished  agricultural 
production 
amounting 
to USD 
100,000/ye
ar27. a 
reduction 
of losses 
in 
agricultura
l 
production 
amounting 
to USD 
150,000/y
ear. 
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks  A7.1 Use by vulnerable 
households, communities, 
businesses and public -
sector services of Fund-
supported tools 
instruments, strategies and 
activities to respond to 
climate change and 
variability   Monitoring 
platform, field 
surveys, data 
collection  
Secondary data: 
annual datasets of 
some producer’s 
associations; i) 
Rice: ENAM; ii) 
Cattle: datasets 
from FEDEGAN; 
iii) Coffee 
Federation 
datasets; iv) Other 
associations  0 (as there 
are no 
Fund-
supported 
tools, 
instruments
, strategies 
and 
activities)   16,077 
are the 
new users 
of these 
tools as a 
result of 
the project 
are 
composed 
as follows:  
Rice 653  
Potato 
2,543 
Sugar 
cane 227  
Panela 
cane 
1,976 
Dairy 
farming 
1,363 
Livestock 
1,363 
Corn 
1,098 
Banana 
88 
Coffee 
6,480 
Gremios: 
Two (2) 
strategies  
(80% 
male, 20% 
female 
household 
heads)  
Farmers 
have 53,590 new 
users of these 
tools as a 
result of the 
project are 
composed as 
follows:  
Rice 2,175  
Potato 8,476  
Sugar cane 
758 
Panela cane 
6,586 
Dairy farming 
4,544 
Livestock 
4,544 
Corn 3,659  
Banana 294 
Coffee 21,600  
Gremios: Four 
(4) strategies  
(80% male, 
20% female 
household 
heads)  
Farmers have 
adapted and 
have an 
income 
increase of 
14.6%  The technologies, 
tools, strategies are 
available and respond 
to the needs of the 
sector.  
The information is 
disseminated and the 
organizations / 
institutions know it  
At least 5 gremios 
strategies included 
information and some 
tools of the project.  
Based on the 
baseline, mid -term 
and final project 
surveys,  short 
surveys after each 
event  the project will 
monitor whether 
participants use the 
tools, instruments, 
etc., generated by the 
project.


---
*Page 52*
---

E E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50 OF 75 
   
  
28 ENAM and AMTEC surveys.  adapted 
and have 
an income 
increase 
of 4.4%  
A8.0 Strengthened 
awareness of climate 
threats and risk -
reduction processes  A8.1 Number of males and 
females made aware of 
climate threats and related 
appropriate responses   Surveys  and focal 
groups  
Secondary data: 
annual datasets of 
some producer’s 
associations; i) 
Rice: ENAM; ii) 
Cattle: datasets 
from FEDEGAN; 
iii) Coffee 
Federation 
datasets; iv) Other 
associations  57,978 
farmers  and 
techniti ans 
28 95,745 
 
(80% 
male, 20% 
women)  224,916 
 
(80% male, 
20% women)  Agro -climatic 
information generated 
is received effectively, 
which maintains 
farmers’ interest in 
actively participating 
in the project  
The tools are 
available and respond 
to the needs of 
technicians and 
producer 
associations.  
Technicians 
participate in the 
training activities . 
The same 
methodologies used 
for ENAM and 
AMTEC surveys shall 
be applied to measure 
the performance 
every year . 
 Number of technologies 
and innovative solutions 
transferred or licensed to 
support low -emission and 
climate resilient 
development as a result of 
GCF support  Monitoring 
platform, field 
surveys, data 
collection  
Secondary data: 
annual datasets of 
some producer’s 
associations; i) 
Rice: ENAM; ii) 
Cattle: datasets 
from FEDEGAN; 
iii) Coffee 
Federation 
datasets; iv) Other 
associations  0 A total of 9 
new 
measures  
and 0 
adopted 
technology  
- 
Measures 
(9): 
sustainabl
e in 
livestock, 
landscape 
restauratio
n planning 
(sugar 
cane and 
livestock), 
efficient 
fertilizer 
use 
(potato 
and rice). 
low water 
consumpti
on (rice 
and 
potato), 
land 
restauratio
n 
(musacea
e and 
potato).  A total of 20 
new measure 
and 3 adopted 
technologies  
- Measures 
(20): 
sustainable in 
livestock, 
landscape 
restauration 
planning 
(sugar cane 
and livestock), 
low water 
consumption 
(rice, potato, 
sugar cane 
and 
musaceae), 
efficient 
fertilizer use 
(potato, corn, 
rice, panela 
and 
musaceae), 
land 
restauration 
(mus aceae, 
potato, sugar 
cane and 
livestock), low 
carbon 
techniques 
(rice, corn, 
potato, The technologies, 
tools, strategies are 
available and respond 
to the needs of the 
sector.  
The information is 
disseminated and the 
organizations / 
institutions know it  
Farmers adopt 
technological 
packages and best 
practices in crop and 
livestock 
management that 
contribute to the 
reduction of CO 2 
emissions


---
*Page 53*
---

E E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51 OF 75 
   
   - 
Technolog
ies:0  panela, 
livestock and 
musaceae)  
- 
Technologies 
(3): new 
varieties for 
rice, corn and 
sugar cane


---
*Page 54*
---

E E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52 OF 75 
   
  
29 Gallego et al, 2021  
30 ENAM and AMTEC surveys . 
31 Impact Evaluation of the Pilot, 2021.  E.5. P roject/ programme  performance indicators  
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre -existing 
conditions, progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE reporting. Add rows as 
needed.  
Expected Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final 
1.1 Strengthened and 
modernized agricultural 
extension system  with an 
emphasis on adaptation and 
mitigation  Percentage of 
farmers/technicians who 
perceived that their 
knowledge improved as a 
result strengthened and 
modernized agriculture 
extension system 
differentiated by gender  Monitoring 
Platform (1) 
and surveys 
(3) directly 
with 
technicians 
after training 
sessions  N/A 15% 60% The 2,200 farmers 
remain interested 
and actively 
participate in the 
project activities.  
 
Local producer 
organizations and 
associations support 
the initiative and are 
willing to participate.  
 
Values are based on 
past observed 
results from similar 
experiences  
1.1 Strengthened and 
modernized agricultural 
extension system  with an 
emphasis on adaptation and 
mitigation  Percentage of farmers that 
use as source of information 
for agroclimatic services  
(bulletins, early warning text 
messages, online 
information) , those promoted 
by the gremios  Surveys and 
user 
information 
from the 
gremios ’ 
platfor ms  21.5% of 
farmers29 25% of 
farmers  32.25%  
of 
farmers  Forecast information 
is used by farmers 
as a source for 
management 
decision making.    
The target assumes 
an increase in 50% 
from the baseline of 
the percentage of 
farmers that use the 
agroclimatic 
services.  
To account for 
quality, the definition 
of “use” w ill be that 
“information received 
is understood and it 
was useful”  
1.2  Agroclimatic services in 
place and/or strengthened Number of farmers aware of 
and who know how to 
differentiate climate risks, 
their effects and related 
mitigation measures, 
differentiated by gender  Surveys  and 
focal groups  57,665 
farmers 30 94,681  
 
This 
includes  
29,612 
target 
farmers 
(20% 
women)  222,097  
 
This 
includes 
98,710 
target 
farmers 
(20% 
women)  Agro -climatic 
information 
generated is 
received effectively, 
which maintai ns 
farmers’ interest in 
actively participating 
in the project  
2.1. Strengthened germplasm 
bank, new climate resilient 
varieties developed and their 
seeds massively distributed  Area planted (in hectares) 
under the variety or using 
seeds recommended for the 
area Surveys  and 
secondary 
data from 
gremios . 
Secondary 
data: annual 
datasets of 
some 
producer’s 
associations; 
i) Rice: 
ENAM; ii) 
Fenalce, iii) 190.000 
ha31 193,600 
ha  
 
This 
includes 
3,600 
target 
hectares 
during 
project 
implement
ation 202.000 
ha  
 
This 
includes 
12,000 
ha 
during 
the 
project 
implem
entation  Field activities for 
variety development 
are not delayed by 
severe weather 
events


---
*Page 55*
---

E E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53 OF 75 
   
  
32 Gallego et al, 2021 –  Annex 23  Coffee 
Federation 
datasets  
(annual stats) ; 
iv) 
Fedepanela  
2.2.  More efficient use of 
water resourc es, restoring soil 
properties, and improving GHG 
mitigation practices by farmers 
and gremios through the 
adoption of new climate smart 
practices and technologies  Area (in hectares) under 
efficient water use practices  Surveys, GIS 
tools . 
 
Secondary 
data: annual 
datasets of 
some 
producer’s 
associations; 
i) Rice: 
ENAM; ii) 
Fenalce, iii) 
Coffee 
Federation 
datasets  
(annual stats) ; 
iv) 
Fedepanela  N/A 758 1,896 Farmers remain 
interested and 
actively participate in 
the project activities.  
Extension activities 
are effective and 
executed in a timely 
manner  
3.1.  Improved business 
models that provide farmers 
with reasonable profits and 
improved GHG mitigation 
practices  Number of value chains 
developing novel and 
inclusive business models to 
boost climate resilient and low 
emissions agriculture  Baseline, 
intermediate 
and final 
surveys  N/A 2 4 Gremios perceived 
the strengthening of 
their capacities for 
implement ing novel 
and inclusive 
business models.  
3.1 Improved business models 
that provide farmers with 
reasonable profits and 
improved GHG mitigation 
practices  Number of financial 
institutions aware of the 
project benefits and 
opportunities and involved in 
projects activities  Baseline, 
intermediate 
and final 
interviews  N/A 7 10 Financia l Institutions 
(FIs) participated 
actively in the 
project.  
In the framework of 
this project, we will 
focus in FI s with 
current activities in 
the agricultural 
sector . By FIs we 
refer to national 
financial institutions 
such as Finagro and 
Fiduagraria, 
commercial banks 
(e.g., Banco Agrario, 
Bancamía, Banco 
W), microfinance 
institutions (e.g. , 
CONTACTAR, 
FINANFUTURO), 
cooperatives (e.g. , 
CONFIAR, 
CoopKennedy) and 
insurance 
companies (e.g. , 
Mapfre).  
3.2. Modernized technical 
assistance and agricultural 
extension services with multi -
tool strategies, differentiated 
and adapted to specific 
environmental, social, gender 
and productive contexts at the 
national level  Percentage of crop loss due 
to climatic effects  Baseline, 
intermediate 
and final 
survey s 
Sendai 
Indicators  20.9%32 19.8% 
(equivalen
t to a 
reduction 
of 5%  from 
baseline)  16.7% 
(equival
ent to a 
reductio
n of 
20% 
from 
baselin
e) Farmers adopt 
recommendations 
and adopt 
technologies to 
increase their 
resilience to adverse 
weather events and 
thereby reduce crop 
losses.


---
*Page 56*
---

E E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 54 OF 75 
   
  
33 Gallego et al, 2021 –  Annex 23  3.2. Modernized technical 
assistance and agricultural 
extension services with multi -
tool strategies, differentiated 
and adapted t o specific 
environmental, social, gender 
and productive contexts at the 
national level  Reduced incidence of climate 
induced pests and diseases  Baseline, 
intermediate 
and final 
survey s 5.8%33 5.5% 
(equivalen
t to a 
reduction 
of 5%  from 
baseline)  4.6% 
(equival
ent to 
20% 
from 
baselin
e) Farmers adopt the 
recommendations of 
experts in precision 
agriculture where 
they manage to 
reduce the impact of 
climate induced 
pests and diseases 
on their crops.  
E.6. Activities  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub -activities. Significant deliverables should be 
reflected in the implementation timetable. Add rows as needed.  
Activity  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Result  1.1. Strengthened and modernized agricultural extension system with an emphasis on adaptation and mitigation  
Activity 1.1.1  Organize the information from 
the different repositories and producer association databases (public and free-access systems) to connect them with updated information available from existing free-access platforms through remote sensing or other sources . SA1. Development of a 
strategy for data collection associated with environmental, social, technological, production and economic indicators . 
SA2. Development of a protocol for the integration of databases with existing crop information.  
SA3. Processing and cleansing of database information.  
SA4. Consolidation of processed information in a database management system.  
SA5. Data analysis using methods based on machine 
learning and computational 
optimization.  
SA6. Dissemination of the 
results to validate recommendations in the field.  
SA7. Development of algorithms for data analysis.  
SA8. Design or adjustment of platforms for capturing, storing and disseminating 
information.  Site-specific management 
recommendations for 381,000 hectares / 46,056 producers for seven (7) crops (rice, maize, potato, panela sugarcane, livestock, banana and plantain) in 213 
municipalities.  
Seven (7) Big Data platforms providing site- specific 
recommendations for 381,000 hectares / 46,056 producers for seven (7) crops (rice, 
maize, potato, sugarcane, 
livestock, banana and plantain) in 213 municipalities  
Activi ty 1.1.2  Develop a bot -based digital 
instrument to strengthen the 
extension service. There are 
plans to develop communication tools that facilitate human -machine 
interaction to provide automatic answers to frequently asked questions in conversations between farmers and technicians. This will facilitate sharing the 
recommendations derived SA1. Development of mass 
dissemination systems based 
on a bot (automatic response 
interaction system) to strengthen t he extension 
services of the producer associations.  
SA2. Engaging with potential 
users to collect a baseline of the information more frequently required for decision making through 
workshops, interviews, Bot service providing recommendations to 15,256 producers for three (3)  crops 
(rice, maize and potato).


---
*Page 57*
---

E E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 55 OF 75 
   
 from data analysis, as well as 
agroclimatic forecasts . questionnaires and possibly 
focus groups.  
SA3. Creating an automatic 
wizard to exchange 
agroclimatic information with 
producers, through chats or 
text messages on planting 
dates, choice of varieties and 
rain forecasts, among others . 
Activity 1.1.3  Design and develop the entire 
data mining and analysis 
operating system that will 
allow interconnecting all 
available information. In turn, 
systems will be developed to enable the automatization of 
analysis and modeling 
processes, in an effort to 
encourage more robust recommendations and more 
agile and efficient processes  SA1. Identification of variables 
to improve site- specific 
analysis and 
recommendations.  
SA2. Instrumentation to capture information using 
remote sensors (drones) and 
non-remote sensors (yield 
sensors, soil moisture, 
electroconductivity, leaf wetness sensors, etc.).  
SA3. Development of a data management routine to allow the integration of the information collected by the instrumentation to Big Data 
platforms.  1,215 professionals and technicians linked to seven (7) 
crops (rice, maize, potato, 
panela sugarcane, livestock, 
banana and plantain) trained.  
Activity 1.1.4  Train technicians in the use 
and application of advanced 
data analysis methods, 
including: i) holding in-person 
and virtual training workshops, and short -term stays of 
professionals from producer associations at CIAT and other centers of excellence, to develop skills in the use of data mining, evolution ary 
computing and remote sensors to generate information for decision-
making in the field; ii) 
Developing, validating and 
implementing a module based 
on graphical interfaces to 
facilitate data analysis and consultation, aimed at 
producer association 
techni cians; iii) Training of 
trainers on Information Literacy for producers with an 
ethnic and gender focus and 
develop and implement dissemination means, including communication 
platforms . SA1.  Design and 
implementation of a training, dissemination and promot ion 
program on the use, requirements and advantages of using the Big Data platform aimed at technicians of the producer associations, other practitioners, producers and other relevant stakeholders.  
SA2. 
 Developing, 
validating and 
implementing a module 
based on graphical 
interfaces to facilitate data 
analysis and consultation, 
aimed at producer association technicians
 
SA3.  Training of trainers 
on Information Literacy  for 
producers with an ethnic 
and gender focus and 
develop and implement 
dissemination means  1,215 professionals and 
technicians linked to seven (7) 
crops (rice, maize, potato, panela sugarcane, livestock, 
banana and plantain) trained.  
Result  1.2. Agroclimatic services in place and/or strengthened  
Activity 1.2.1  Design and/or strengthen 
agroclimatic information 
services. It seeks to expand 
the coverage of information SA1. Evaluation of climate 
forecasts at different time scales (e.g., seasonal, sub-
seasonal) exploring the Four (4) improved 
agroclimatic platfor ms with 
better forecasting 
performance (sugarcane,


---
*Page 58*
---

E E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 56 OF 75 
   
 services to reduce the 
agroclimatic risk for new 
productive systems (potatoes, panela sugarcane, livestock, banana and plantain) and 
strengthen exist ing 
agroclimatic information 
services which function independently for rice, corn, 
sugarcane and coffee.  influence of meteorological 
factors (e.g., tropical activity in 
the Atlantic Ocean) on seasonal climate behavior and include their effect in seasonal 
projections.  
SA2.  Developing a network to 
collect climate information 
(meteorological stations 
network) in prioritized sites  . 
SA3. Identifying and mapping 
areas that are vulnerable to 
experience water and biological stress, based on their water supply . 
SA4. C reating, structuring and 
implementing the Cenicaña AgroClimate Service for the Cauca River Valley, including 
the automation of t he 
productivity prediction system 
for sugarcane and the 
analysis of climatic variables . 
SA5. Adjusting and validating 
climate prediction models in coffee and its relationship with diseases, and making 
recommendations.  coffee, rice and maize) 
serving 89,000 producers.  
Five (5) new agroclimatic platforms in operation (potato, panela sugarcane, livestock, 
banana and plantain) serving 
37,123 producers.  
Activity 1.2.2  Develop more accurate and 
precise climate and weather 
prediction models and 
complementary improved crop 
simulation models by using 
new-generation climate 
models, improving the performance of climate 
prediction models, modeling 
crop physiological processes,  
including alerts for pests, 
diseases and other abiotic 
factors (for example, frosts), 
and irrigation planning and 
optimization.  SA1. Evaluation of climate 
forecasts at different time 
scales ( e.g., seasonal, sub-
seasonal) exploring the influence of meteoro logical 
factors ( e.g., tropical activity in 
the Atlantic Ocean) on 
seasonal climate behavior and 
include their effect in seasonal 
projections  for eight crops 
(rice, maize, potato, panela 
sugarcane, livestock, coffee, 
banana and plantain) . 
SA2. Develop and implement new methods for calibration of simulation models ( e.g., 
generic variety groups), as 
well as protocols for data 
capture during experimental 
evaluations ( i.e., crop 
improvement group, and crop 
monitoring). Set -up of 
experimental plots to collect information useful for model calibration.  
SA3. Calibration of simulation models under different agronomic management conditions (irrigation and fertilization) through t he 
evaluation of water and 
nitrogen balance modules.  Calibrated simulation models for eight crops (rice, maize, potato, panela sugarcane, livestock, coffee, banana and plantain) for 24 sets of genetic materials.  
 Bioclimatic evaluation and characterization of livestock production regions in Colombia.  
 Development and calibration 
of pest and disease alert 
prediction models (based on 
climate) for three (3) crops 
(rice, coffee and panela 
sugarcane).  
 A 1–10-day time-scale 
forecasting service for rice.  
 
A 1-to-3-week  sub-seasonal 
forecasting service for rice.


---
*Page 59*
---

E E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 57 OF 75 
   
 SA4. Performance evaluation 
of simulation models at the 
level of commercial plots.  
SA5. Determine the uncertainty resulting from 
climatic and agronomic 
modeling and their coupling.  
SA6. Analysis of climatic and biophysical variables in 
livestock production areas.  
Activity 1.2.3  Connect agroclimatic 
forecasts with artificial 
intelligence models (Result 
1.1). SA1. Integration of 
agroclimatic information to 
mass dissemination systems (bot).  
SA2. Usability tests with producers of agroclimatic platforms and mass 
dissemination systems.  
SA3. Adjustments in outputs 
and generation of new 
services based on needs.  
SA4.  Generation of 
visualization interfaces 
targeted at different users according to agroclimatic 
information needs.  One million producers receive agro-climatic recommendations through agro-climatic platforms and bot services for seven (7) crops (rice, maize, potato, panela sugarcane, banana, 
plantain and sugarcane) and 
livestock production.  
Activity 1.2.4  Strengthen mechanisms to 
disseminate agroclimatic information and transfer capacities  . SA1. Design and 
implementation of a training, dissemination and promotion 
program on the use, 
requirements and advantages of using the agroclimatic platforms, targeted at technicians of the producer associations, other practitioners, producers and other relevant actors.  
SA2. Strengthening of the mechanisms for co-production, translation, transfer and use of agroclimatic information in the existing Agroclimatic 
Technical Committees 
(MTAs).  
SA3. Operation and creation 
of new Agroclimatic Technical 
Committees  (MTAs).  961 people trained in six (6) crops (rice, maize, potato, sugarcane, banana and plantain) and livestock 
production.  
 
Operation of all existing MTAs 
(13 MTAs).  
 Creation and operation of at 
least 2 MTAs.  
Activity 1.2.5  Other activities related to 
producing, transferring or using agroclimatic information (automation of meteorological 
information, analysis of 
climate change signals, 
nutrient balance models) . SA1. Model, through the use 
of information generated by Cenicafe and new research, 
the inputs and outputs of nutrients in coffee production systems in the face of climate variability.  
SA2. Analysis of historical climate information from the network of stations in the sugarcane sector.  
SA3. Evaluate the water balance and fertilization 
modules of the rice crop Development of a model of nutritional alerts (based on climate) for coffee.  
 Exploration of climate change 
signals in the CRV (1994-
2020) for the plain region of 
the Valle del Cauca department.  
 Water balance and fertilization modules for rice models 
developed.


---
*Page 60*
---

E E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 58 OF 75 
   
 models, in order to broaden 
their application in decision 
making and in the optimization of natural and agro- industrial  
resources.  
Result  2.1. Strengthened germplasm bank, new climate resilient varieties developed and their seeds massively 
distributed  
Activity 2.1.1.  Develop a state-of -the-art 
phenotyping platform designed to identify low carbon production and 
climate -resistant genetic 
resources  . SA1. Install, calibrate  and test 
growth chambers designed to 
simulate future climatic conditions by manipulating lighting, temperature and relative humidity.  
SA2. Install and test field equipment that supports image and sensor data 
capture  
SA3. Calibrate and test 
cameras and sensors to 
quantify the impact of abiotic 
stresses on photosynthesis.  
SA4. Sequencing of parental genetic material and/or progeny.  
SA5. Application of a genomic 
selection model.  A phenotyping platform 
developed and at the service 
of crops  
Activity 2.1.2.  Identify heat, drought and 
excess water tolerant 
accessions for rice, maize, potatoes, Musaceae, and 
livestock (forages) . SA1. Detect physiological 
traits using the phenotyping 
platform established in Activity 2.1.1.  
SA2. DNA sequencing to identify regions of the genome 
that control the evaluated traits.  
SA3. Identify traits to increase crop resilience.  
SA4. Selection and evaluation under controlled conditions for water deficit, low nitrogen and waterlogging of elite parental 
lines.  5 accessions wit h tolerance to 
heat and drought identified for rice, forage, banana, corn and 
sugar cane crops  
Activity 2.1.3.  Develop new varieties from 
advanced lines for climate change adaptation and mitigation for rice, maize, livestock, banana (varieties that are t olerant or resistant to 
water deficit and diseases that demand high use of chemical fungicides, such as black 
Sigatoka) and sugarcane 
(water deficit, waterlogging and greater efficiency in nitrogen use) . SA1. Establishment of 
experimental plots for the evaluation and selection of materials.  
SA2. Characterization and selection of lines, hybrids or varieties with tolerance to high night temperatures, low radiation and high CO
2 
concentrations.  
SA3. New crosses with promising lines  
SA4. Validation and 
perfor mance evaluation of 
materials developed in other countries but that have not been tested in Colombia.  
SA5. Selection of lines with 
better performance  8 new materials at the service of producers for rice, banana, fodder, corn and sugar cane crops


---
*Page 61*
---

E E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 59 OF 75 
   
 SA6. Evaluation of 
greenhouse gas emissions of 
different genetic materials.  
SA7. Materials registration process  and r elease of new 
materials.  
Activity 2.1.4.   Massive seed multiplication 
for coffee, sugarcane, panela 
sugarcane, potato, banana 
and plantain through in vitro 
culture or the buds method for 
distribution to farmers  . SA1. Establish thermotherapy 
protocol  
SA2. Cleaning by 
cryopreserv ation.  
SA3. Multiplication of material.  SA4. Virus and disease detection.  
SA5. Implementation of the in-
vitro technique of Somatic 
Embryogenesis (SE).  
SA6. Implement the use of 
bioreactors for scaling up.  four propagation protocols for 
potato, banana, cof fee, sugar 
cane, and panela cane crops. 
Seedbeds of the species propagated to establish trials in 230 hectares for the same crops.  
Result  2.2. More efficient use of water resources, restoring soil properties, and improving GHG mitigation practices by 
farmers and gremios through the adoption of new climate smart practices and technologies  
Activity 2.2.1.  Quantifying the baseline water footprint in six (6) crops (potato, sugarcane, panela sugarcane bananas, 
plantains, and livestock) and 
in the industrial phase of 
sugar production . SA1. Definition and/or 
installation of crop plots for 
measurements.  
SA2. Purchase, installation and calibration of equipment.  
SA3. Data collection and recording of other variables of 
interest.  
SA4. Measurement of water 
consumption for different technologies and management techniques for the crops prioritized by the project.  
SA5. Collection of complementary information.  
SA6. Measurement of water footprints for different crops under different production 
models.  Water consumption values measured for the conventional management of five (5) crops 
(potato, panela s ugarcane, 
sugarcane, plantain, banana) and livestock production in sixteen (16) areas of the country.  
Water footprints calculated for the conventional management of four (4) crops (potato, panela sugarcane, plantain, 
banana) and livestock 
production in si xteen (16) 
locations.  
Activity 2.2.2.  Quantifying the baseline carbon footprint for seven (7) 
crops (rice, potato, sugarcane, 
panela cane, bananas, 
plantain, and livestock), 
fertilizer use and industrial 
processing in sugarcane 
cultivation . SA1. Definition and/or 
installation of crop plots for 
measurements.  
SA2. Purchase, installation and calibration of equipment to measure GHG.  
SA3. Collection of information and recording of data on the measurement of GHG and other variables of interest.  
SA4. Qu antification of GHG 
for different genetic materials, management technologies 
and techniques for the crops 
prioritized by the project.  
SA5. Compilation of 
complementary information.  
SA6. Quantification of the 
carbon footprint for different crops under different 
production models.  TIER 2 emission factors for conventional management technologies or techniques for eight (8) crops (rice, maize, 
potato, panela sugarcane, 
sugarcane, banana, plantain, 
coffee) and livestock 
production in 22 zones of the 
country.  
Carbon footprints calculated 
for conventional management 
technologies or techniques for 
seven (7) crops (rice, potato, 
panela sugarcane, sugarcane, 
banana, plantain) and livestock production.


---
*Page 62*
---

E E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 60 OF 75 
   
 Activity 2.2.3.  Hydrological modeling of 
basins to identify water harvesting points in rice, panela cane, bananas, and coffee production systems  . 
 SA1. Collect spatial and 
hydroclimatic information in the watershed.  
SA2. Construction and validation of the hydrological 
model and generation of 
scenarios of changes in 
coverage and climate forecasts.  
SA3. Mapping, identification 
and validation of water 
harvesting points.  
SA4. Generation of water conduction routes.  
SA5. Construction of water reservoirs (panela cane, 
plantain and coffee).  
SA6. Training workshops for 
practitioners of the sector.  
SA7. Efficient planning of water uses  at the level of 
irrigation districts.  Implementation of planning models for water efficient use 
in four (4) water supply basins 
for four (4)  crops (rice, panela 
sugarcane and banana).  
Activity 2.2.4.  Evaluation of efficient water 
use practices in agronomic management and 
transformation proce sses 
(e.g., milling of panela cane) 
in potato, panela cane, plantain, banana, coffee crops and livestock  . SA1.  Identifying and 
formulating agronomic management practices and industrial transformation.  
SA2.  Selecting and 
implementing conventional product ive plots with efficient 
use practices . 
SA3. Installing equipment to 
monitor moisture balance.  
SA4.  Creating moisture 
balance and monitoring water quality . 
SA5.  Quantifying the water 
footprint in conventional systems and efficient water use practices . 
SA6.  Training workshops on 
monitoring and managing 
efficient water use systems . Water consumption values 
measured for ten sustainable management technologies or techniques for five (5) crops 
(potato, panela, sugarcane, plantain, banana, coffee) and livestock production in sixteen (16) areas of the country.  
Evaluation of the performance 
of wastewater and sludge 
treatment systems in four (4) locations.  
Eight (8) water footprints calculated for eight (8) sustainable management technologies or techniques in four (4) crops (potato, panela sugarcane, plantain, banana) and livestock production in 
sixteen (16) locations.  
Activity 2.2.5.  Evaluation of GHG emission 
mitigation practices in 
agronomic management and 
transformation processes in 
rice, maize, potato, panela 
cane, plantain, banana, 
coffee, sugarcane crops, and 
livestock  . SA1. Definition and/or 
installation of crop plots for measurements.  
SA2. Purchase, installation and calibration of equipment to measure GHG.  
SA3. Collection of information and recording of data on the measurement of GHG and other variables of interest.  
SA4. Quantification of GHG for different genetic materials, technologies and management techniques for the crops prioritized by the 
project.  
SA5. Collection of 
complementary information  
SA6. Quantification of the 
carbon footprint for different TIER 2 emission factors for  
one hundred and fifteen (115) 
genetic materials, eighteen (18) management technologies or techniques for eight (8) crops (rice, maize, potato, panela sugarcane, sugarcane, banana, plantain, coffee) and livestock production, and six ( 6) cattle 
feed supplem entation diets in 
22 zones of the country.  
Fourteen (14) carbon footprints calculated for 10 sustainable crop management 
technologies or techniques in 
six (6) crops (rice, potato, panela sugarcane, sugarcane, 
banana, plantain) and 
livestock production.


---
*Page 63*
---

E E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 61 OF 75 
   
 crops under different 
production models.  
Activity 2.2.6.  Landscape restoration in 
sugarcane cultivation and 
livestock systems . SA1. Identification of potential 
areas for intervention and 
landscape units.  
SA2. Implementation of a 
nursery for the propagation of native species.  
SA3. Land cover mappi ng 
SA4. Implementation  Sustainable livestock systems implemented in 3,840 ha in 16 
areas of the country.  
Activity 2.2.7.  Massive implementation of 
agronomic management technologies and transformation processes that enable more efficient use of 
water and promote low -carbon 
development in rice, maize, 
potato, sugarcane, plantain, banana, and livestock 
production.  SA1. Selection of beneficiary 
farms and lots.  
SA2. Training for producers.  
SA3. Implementation of 
sustainable production models 
in seven (7) c rops prioritized 
by the project.  
SA4. Generating 
dissemination material . 
SA5. Implementing 
sustainable systems/practices 
at the regional level . 5,750 ha in sustainable 
production models for rice, 
maize, potato, panela 
sugarcane, banana and 
plantain to reduce GHG 
emissions and water consumption in 33 production areas of the country.  
Result 3.1. Improved business models that provide farmers with reasonable profits and improved GHG mitigation 
practices  
Activity 3.1.1  Strengthen gremios capacities 
to use digitally enabled tools 
that improve the provision of services to farmers with emphasis on profitable production system that also reduce GHG emissions and increase climate -resilience SA1. Assessment of gremios 
capabilities and needs, as well 
as, opportunit ies to better -
inform their allocation of 
resources (human, financial) to respond to farmers demands and help them to manage climate to their advantage.  
SA2. Co -design of 
implementation plans for gremios to the decision-making processes to cost -
effectively enhance their provision of climate-related services to farmers.  
SA3. Co -develop feedback 
loop mechanisms to provide information to the gremios to inform allocation of 
resources/efforts (human, financial) for climate-related 
services provision to farmers.   Eight (8) gremios strengthened in the decision-making processes  
Activity 3.1.2  Implement inclusive climate -
resilient and low -carbon 
business models f or 
agricultural products and 
services . SA1.  Systematization of the 
results generated by the 
components of the project on digital agriculture, climate-smart and low -carbon 
practices to guide its inclusion into business models . 
SA2. Coordinate producers, 
gremios, buyers and other 
actors in the value chains, to 
prioritize opportunities for improvement, as well as 
barriers that limit the 
escalation of climate Eight (8) strategies for scaling 
up climate resilience and GHG emission reduction 
practices for selected value 
chains.  
 
Eight (8) business models with a focus on adaptation and GHG emissions reduction 
(designed, implemented and 
evaluated)


---
*Page 64*
---

E E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 62 OF 75 
   
 resilience and low emission 
practices . 
SA3. Design of an escalation 
strategy (with gremios, 
producers and other actors) 
that allows the integration of 
digital agriculture elements 
and climate services to the 
value chains, to increase 
climate resilience and mitigate GHG emissions . 
SA4. Implement business 
models for producers and 
buyers, to enhance climate 
mitigation practices and 
evaluate market opportunities for differential products . 
SA5. Evaluate changes in the 
business models of producers 
and buyers, and identify 
lessons learned and success 
factors in scaling up digital 
agriculture mechanisms and low-carbon practices in the 
value chains.  
Activity 3.1.3 . Enhance financial sector 
engagement with farmers and 
their needs and efforts on 
climate -resilience and climate 
mitigation activities  SA 1. Implementation of a 
capacity building program to 
raise awareness of financial sector institutions (banks, MFIs, fina ncial cooperatives, 
insurance companies, etc.) on 
mid and long-term de-risking 
mechanisms that the project will implement throughout its components ( e.g., DCIPs, 
climate -smart practices and 
technologies).  
SA2. Facilitate participation and involvement of f inancial 
institutions in the MTAs for accessing local and tailored information on climate- smart 
actions implemented by the agricultural sector to reduce climate risks, which will 
reduce uncertainty and may 
incentivize the design of 
tailored financial produ cts for 
the agricultural sector.  
SA3. Identify opportunities 
with financial institutions and prioritize cases studies to provide technical support for incorporating climate-resilient 
and low -carbon criteria to their 
agricultural financial products in comp liance with the 
environmental, social, and 
governance (ESG) criteria.  Evidence of at least four (4) 
financial institutions that participate in MTAs and use information provided by the project to inform their businesses contributing to wide implementation of 
climate -resilient and low -
carbon options in agricultural 
sector.  
Activity 3.1.4.  Fostering agri -digital 
entrepreneurship ecosystems  SA1. explore and identify 
potential opportunities for new 
ventures.  A new venture identified and 
created based on new digital 
technologies.


---
*Page 65*
---

E E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 63 OF 75 
   
 SA2 support creation of new 
ventures and transforming 
existing businesses by developing new digital 
technologies . 
Result  3.2. Modernized technical assistance and agricultural extension services with multi -tool strategies, differentiated 
and adapted to specific environmental, social, gender and productive contexts at the national level  
Activity 3.2.1  Foster inclusion of two-way 
digitally enabled tools for 
enhancing models for 
technology transfer technical assist ance within an 
innovations system approach  SA1.  Linking plans directed by 
Agrosavia , for Musaceae , 
potato and panela sugarcane; HUB innovation model applied by CIMMYT for maize; Knowledge Management Model in Sustainable Livestock by Fedegan; Dissemination campaigns of 
the National Extension 
Service of the National 
Federation of Coffee G rowers; 
AMTEC mass adoption model 
in rice; The technical 
cooperation and technology 
transfer service (SCTT) with the network of Technology Transfer Groups (GTT) in sugarcane; Rural School Methodology (ECAS) by Asohofrucol  – Musaseas . 
SA2.  Exchange of 
exper iences . 
SA3.  Use of voice (IVR) and 
text (SMS) messaging, WhatsApp networks and chatbot . 
SA4 Gremios  digitally enabled  
platforms or available mobile 
applications.  54,000 producers strengthened in the implementation of resilient 
and low -carbon technologies.  
Activity 3. 2.2 Capability development on 
innovation systems approach 
and its inclusion into updated technology transfer plans  SA1. Carry out events to 
disseminate the project and its content.  
SA2. General training sessions by Result .  
SA3. Work meetings.  
SA4. Development of written 
material, in physical and 
digital form.  
SA5. Development of videos 
with the project topics.  
SA6.   Follow -up and joint work 
with the Agroclimatic 
Technical Committees.  30 awareness materials (booklets, brochures, flyers, factsheets, videos, etc.) to support training (standardized in language and concepts) for different types of audiences with 6,000 pi eces (copies).  
Activity 3. 2.3 Strengthen gremios and farmers capacities on climate adaptation and mitigation and nurture knowledge exchanges across farmers groups.  SA1. Conduct topic -specific 
workshops . 
SA2.  Hold  operation planning 
meetings .  
SA3. Dedicate working 
sessions  for co -creation of 
procedures, implementation of experiments, analysis of 
results . 4,400 technicians strengthened in capacities on implementation of climate change adaptation and 
mitigation actions.  
3 communities of practice 
created and in operation.


---
*Page 66*
---

E E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 64 OF 75 
   
 SA4. Communities of practice 
on Digital Agriculture and 
Data Analysis, Generation of climate forecasts, and Communication and outreach;  
SA5. Conduct open training courses on specific topics on 
virtual education platforms;  
SA6. Strengthening of 
academic programs, graduate 
theses and internships.  
Activity 3. 2.4 Develop a strategy t hat allows 
dissemination, access and 
use of project results by key 
public and private 
stakeholders  SA1. Management meetings 
with national institutions.  
SA2. Executive reports to producer associations on 
progress and needs towards 
sustainability of services.  
SA3. Communication through 
traditional and digital media, social media channels, project website.  
SA4. Development of 
infographics (Project identity).  Sixty (60) entities of the agricultural sector strengthened in climate change adaptation and 
mitigation actions.  
E.7. Monitoring , reporting and e valuation  arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
134. Monitoring and evaluation system .  The monitoring and evaluation of the impact of the CSICAP Project will 
consider the different levels (producer, farmer associations  and other relevant actors) that will be participating in 
the interventions. The Impact and Results indicators proposed by the GCF will be taken as a basis, however, some 
specific indicators by farmer associations  will also be added. To carry out the implementation of the Monitoring 
system, a joint work of the teams of the different institutions involved will be coordinated. In this way, the system 
will be implemented by the CIAT Bioversity Alliance, led by the Prospects, Applied Economics and Impact team 
(FAE4Impact) in coordination with Agrosavia. This group will be in charge of collecting information from different 
sources and  conducting periodic monitoring analyzes. In methodological terms, the appropriate methods will be 
applied for this type of intervention, such as differences in differences, matching and instrumental variables, 
complemented with qualitative analyzes. In the first phase, a baseline will be designed and built, taking advantage 
of databases already built or new data will be collected depending on their availability. In the last year, the final line 
will be developed so that the final impact of the Project can be measured.  
135. In the technologies / alternatives that seek an efficient use of water resources and low carbon (emission 
reduction and carbon capture), the water footprint and the carbon footprint of the proposed systems will be 
measured versus the conventional systems used by the producers, comparing also productivity and costs of both 
systems so that the comparative advantages of the proposed system can be demonstrated. The recommendation 
domains of each alternative will be analyzed and based on this, a net work of demonstration farms will be designed 
and implemented that will allow the creation of technology transfer nodes and offer technical support to producers 
who adopt the technology.  
136. Monitoring by CAF . The CAF will carry out administrative missions or i nspection visits, depending on the 
importance and complexity of the project execution, according to the monitoring plan developed each year by the 
CAF project team. In addition to the field visits, biannual meetings will be held in conjunction with the Exe cuting 
Unit and the CAF to discuss, update and review the progress of the Project management tools, among other 
aspects, such as: i) progress of the identified activities in the annual plan of activities; ii) level of compliance with 
the indicators establi shed in the Monitoring Plan for each component; (iii) Annual Operations Plan for the following 
year and updating of the Project Execution Plan; (iv) Procurement Plan for the next 12 months; (v) financial 
progress; (vi) update of the Risk Matrix; and (vii) possible modifications to the budget allocations by component. 
The Executing Unit undertakes to maintain a Monitoring and Evaluation System for each component, the basis of 
which will be used to develop the reports and data submitted to the CAF. These aspects will be presented at the 
portfolio review meetings that CAF organizes every six months.  
137. Reports .  During project implementation, the monitoring strategy will be applied with the following reporting 
system:  
138. Semiannual reports.  The semi -annual reports wi ll allow feedback on the different activities and make 
corrections if necessary while the project is in progress. These reports will be made with the information collected 
from the sources mentioned above and with a guide of indicators already established.  These reports will have a


---
*Page 67*
---

E E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 65 OF 75 
   
 specific template and will be concise in the information of interest. The reports will be presented to the MADR, CAF 
and GCF. These monitoring reports must specify:  
• The progress of the activities carried out compared to those pro grammed in the work plan for that period, 
indicating the achievements of the products.  
• Presentation of the difficulties (if any) of the implementation process of the activities, especially of a technical 
nature, explaining the justification for these diffi culties.  
• Recommendations for solutions to the difficulties that were identified in the structure that manages the project 
and how the global agenda would be adjusted.  
• Next steps and expectations for the next semester.  
139. Annual Reports . These reports will be accompanied by semi -annual monitoring, these will be more of an 
evaluation of the activities that were carried out in the year and are complemented with other indicators more aimed 
at results. In addition, it will express the lessons learned from the year based on the monitoring and activities that 
each component highlights as achievements during that period, being a document of great help in decision- making.  
140. Final Report .  At the end of the project, a report will be developed that includes the results achieved versus 
those planned by crops and disaggregated by gender where appropriate.  
141. Evaluation .  An evaluation is planned at the end of the project to measure the final results of the main indicators 
defined. It is proposed to carry out the evaluation at three levels: i) micro or household level (producers and their 
household); ii) at the meso or organizational level with a focus on farmer associations ; and, iii) at the macro level, 
in terms of influence on policies related to climate change.


---
*Page 68*
---

F F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 66 OF 75 
   
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max.  3 pages)   
 
Selected Risk Factor 1  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Stakeholder risk: In general, the community of farmers and ranchers tends to be very conservative when adapting to 
new technologies, varieties or crops, presenting a very important but passive resistance to the introduction of new 
profitable procedures or systems.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
This risk can be mitigated by establishing close relationships with relevant stakeholders, including the Government and 
stakeholders at the end of the production chain. These measures decrease the probability that the risk will occur, to a 
lower level.  
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Medium  
Description  
Technical performance risk: This risk is related to possible incorrect design or management of trials and pilot projects, 
or failures in partnership agreements or institutional settings. The probability of these risks occurring is very low 
despite the high level of impact they represent.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
To mitigate this risk, CIAT will establish a Project Coordination Team with the capacity to travel to monitor progress and 
detect mismanagement and non -compliance risks early, and take action on time.  
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Risk of delay and cancellation of costs: There is an inherent risk of delay in planned scheduled works, including the 
acquisition of inputs, human resources, materials and tools. This risk is likely to occur with a medium impact. In the 
event of a time del ay, a possible result is increased costs.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Contingencies should be included in the project's budget estimates, as a mitigation measure for this risk. Another measure is a close budgetary and financial monitoring to avoid possible delays or cancellations. A CIAT coordinator 
will be in charge of the operational aspects to detect early risks and act on time.  
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Sustainability risk: The lack of governance or mechanisms that limit the sustainability of the project is a risk of medium 
probability and high impact.


---
*Page 69*
---

F F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 67 OF 75 
   
 Mitigation Measure(s)  
From the beginning of the project, each actor will have clear responsibilities assigned during the execution period, as 
well as after the project ends, and will be assumed by the farmers themselves. Strengthening producer associations 
will help mitigate this risk as they will provide technical and financial support to their members. Once the project is 
completed, maintenance and operation plans will be est ablished to provide adequate maintenance to the infrastructure 
and guarantee a long useful life.  
Selected Risk Factor 5   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Medium  
Description  
Location risk: the project will carry out activities in remote areas with difficult access, which represents a risk for the 
execution of the project in terms of delays and costs.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
To mitigate the risk, the location will be a criterion for the selection of pilots, and those closest to the logistics structure 
will be preferred. CIAT will have the capacity to provide supervision at all implementation sites, with regular visits and 
reports.  
Selected Risk Factor 6  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Forex  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Foreign exchange risk: financial planning can be affected by currency fluctuations in the future.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Coverage and good planning can help mitigate this risk. This would not change the probability, but it would mitigate the impact that the exchange rate may have on project costs.  
Selected Risk Factor 7  
Category  Probability  Impact  
ML/FT  Low High 
Description  
Probability and impact for money laundering, terrorist financing and prohibited practices risks.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
CAF has established an AML program, customer screening, monitoring and related due diligence procedures that are designed to prevent doing business with entities and/or persons that engage in illegal activities, sanctions screening 
which includes lists of sanctions and restricted persons issued by countries or by international organizations (UE, UN, 
US- OFAC, UK, France, Canada, World Bank, Inter -American Development Bank, and a designated Compliance 
Officer.  
 
The contract  (legal agreement) signed among CA F and executive agency and other relevant parties, there are 
obligations to comply with AML and FT regulations and to prevent prohibited practices. Additionally, the business 
manager performs due diligence through the AMLCFT risk profile and KYC checklist.  They also carry out the screening 
of the MHCP, MADR and related parties against the international sanctions lists. The information is updated according to the risk profile, once a year for low -risk clients and twice a year for medium risk . 
Selected Risk Factor 8  
Category  Probability  Impact


---
*Page 70*
---

F F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 68 OF 75 
   
 Other  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Volatility of agricultural commodities prices . 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
As part of its implementation, the CSICAP project will contribute to the reduction of crop price volatility, often associated 
with climatic events, with the improved information from big data, agroclimatic services, and improved crop 
management, which will allow farmers to improve decision making, lowering uncertainty and better coupling pr oduction 
with markets to reduce crop price variation.  Regarding the prices of the supplies, i n the event of a high increase of the 
price s of them , it is possible to reach an agreement with the producers´ association (which are strategic partners  of the 
project) who usually have stock and the quantity required by the project is quite small.  
Selected Risk Factor 9  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Medium  
Description  
The ability to find suitable contractors to undertake the work at the expected pricepoint . 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
There is a pool of human talent that has worked in previous/similar experiences as the CSICAP project in Colombia so 
the risk to find suitable contractors to undertake the work at the expected price point is low. The risk will be mitigated 
by using this pool of human talent, as well as pursuing new talent from qualified rosters of candidates that can meet 
the minimum experience and the expected price point . Additional mitigation measure considered was during the 
formulation process of the project because the producers´ associations were active actors and they will be strategic 
partners for the implementation, so their human talent skills have been considered in the whole process.  
Selected Risk Factor 10 
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low High 
Description  
Vertical dissemination to farmers of the technologies and good practices under components 1 and 2.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
During the formulation process of the CSICAP project with the farmers associations (gremios) and the MADR , it During 
the formulation process of the CSICAP project with the farmers associations (gremios) and the MADR, the transfer of 
technology and its dissemination has been included as a key aspect in each component of the project considering the 
lessons learned f rom the pilot. As a result, there are dissemination and training activities with the technicians and with 
farmers in each component to strengthen the adoption of the technologies and its use by farmers. In addition, there will 
be signed agreements between Gremios – Farmers/ producers based on previous experiences of projects between 
MADR -CIAT -Gremios that involve technology transfer to producers. These agreements will include three main sections: 
(i) protocol for technology delivery, control, and follow -up; (ii) guideline for the implementation and use of the technology 
and; (iii) certificate of Delivery which will be signed by the producer and gremio including a photographic record .


---
*Page 71*
---

G G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 69 OF 75 
   
 
 GCF POLICIES  AND STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 page s)  
Provide the environmental and social risk category  
142. Environmental and Social risk category. Taking into account the CAF safeguards evaluation exercise and 
the guidelines established by the GCF , this Project has been classified in Category B, that is, it presents moderate 
environmental and social impacts in the project's intervention areas. The project will specifically intervene in areas 
where prioritized production chains are already established and seeks to reduce their impact on natural resources 
through the implementation of good agricultural practices such as reducing the water and carbon footprint, as well as reducing GHG emissions through the implementation of new technologies that allow adaptation to climatic 
conditions and benefit producers. The identification of environmental and social r isks was carried out in which it is 
evidenced that the possible impacts of the implementation of the project are reversible and can be controlled 
through the proposed mitigation measures, especially in relation to the inclusion of women in the activities and 
benefits of the project, the production of new varieties of plants resistant to climate variability, and the production 
systems that currently exist in pa ramo areas, among others.  
143. Environmental and Social Management Framework . An environmental and social assessment (ESA) was 
developed and included in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that was also prepared 
for CSICAP, in line with the requirements demanded by the GCF  for a project Category B. In paramo ecosystems, 
according to the guidelines of this law, it is important that CSICAP strengthen initiatives for agricultural reconversion, especially when it comes to livestock activities, as well as measures to reduce the use of agrochemicals. In addition, 
it is of great relevance for th e Project and the agricultural sector to promote spaces for participation and discussion 
in which the existing challenges are addressed in the implementation of agricultural practices in moorland 
ecosystems. The CSICAP Project has much to contribute in these aspects, including supporting the national government, especially the MADR, to promote, document and implement sustainable production practices with low 
environmental and social impact. Regarding the use of agrochemicals, it is suggested that the farmer  associations  
review the existing protocols, in order to promote greater adoption of good practices by producers, in such a way that not only environmental but also environmental risks can be reduced. in human health.  
144. The social analysis showed that most of the producers in the chains and territories prioritized by the project are 
older than 60 years  of age. This imposes challenges, not only in terms of generational change with greater youth 
participation, but also in relation to the promotion of change, the adoption of knowledge and new technologies, and 
the communication and implementation methods used. In addition, peasant producers and those belonging to ethnic groups currently implement production and conservation practices that have cultural root s, several of which 
must be recognized and incorporated into the Project in order to generate trust and at the same time promote 
appropriation and construction. social knowledge. Added to the above is the low digital connectivity of the territories 
partici pating in the Project and the fact that the changes entail economic risks that can be difficult for small 
producers to manage. These and other factors put at risk the adoption by the beneficiaries of the knowledge, technology, practices and models that are  expected to be disseminated through CSICAP.  
145. Given this scenario, the ESMF recommends, among other aspects, a more participatory approach, in which a 
strategy for the social appropriation of knowledge and a communications plan are formulated. This approach must 
respond, in a differentiated way, to the specific characteristics of the producers of each production chain and the conditions of the territories, and must recognize and incorporate traditional and local knowledge and practices, using an inclusive and easily understood language.  
146. In summary, the ESMF established, among others, the development of the following plans and strategies:  
• Risk management plan associated with security issues.  
• Strategy for the social appropriation of knowledge.  
• Communications pl an. 
• Risk management plan for natural disasters and environmental emergencies.  
• Comprehensive solid waste management plan and development and implementation of roadmaps . 
• Environmental plans that incorporate matters related to Payments for Environmental Services, restoration, 
landscape management tools, conservation agreements, among others.  
• Updating of occupational health and safety plans, measures and protocols related to the use of pesticides and agrochemicals.  
• Educación económica y financiera para pequeños productores/as agropecuarios.  
147. Regarding the administration of the ES MF, it was defined that the Project Management Unit will be the 
maximum responsible for the ES MF of CSICAP, and its fulfillment and implementation will be through CIAT,  the 
farmer associations , Agrosavia and other entities that carry out project activities. The Unit will have an 
Environmental, Social and Gender Support Team, which will respond to the directives of the General Director of 
the project who will be its leader. The Project Management Unit, through the Environmental, Social and Gender 
Team, will provide guidelines and technical advice for compliance with the ES MF. The Environmental, Social and


---
*Page 72*
---

G G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 70 OF 75 
   
 Gender Team will be in charge of designing ES MF guidelines, plans an d strategies, providing support during 
implementation, monitoring progress and compliance as stipulated in ES MF, and supporting the revision and 
updating of ES MF.  In addition, if is required, it is possible for the stakeholder’s access to the GCF’s Independent 
Redress Mechanism (IRM).  
148. Finally, action, product and result indicators were established to monitor and follow up on the ESMF  (including 
the Gender Action Plan (GAP) ). The action period of each activity was defined (before, during and after 
implementation). Those responsible for compliance and monitoring of each action were established (MADR, CAF, 
CIAT, farmer associations , extensionists). The methods and reporting periods for monitoring and reporting (annual, 
monthly, as required) were also defined.  
149. Capacity of the procured parties  to implement the ESMP . In summary, two groups of farmer associations  
are evident: The first group has a medium capacity (they require formulating or updating the entity's environmental 
management plans, strengthening its information systems and monitoring of affiliates and environmental issues, 
improving the accompaniment of producers / thus, develop protocols for the attention of complaints  and claims, 
seek greater approaches with the environmental authorities) and is integrated by Fedepapa, Fenalce and 
Fedepanela. The second group is made up of farmer associations with a high capacity (they have developed the 
above measures but require revi ewing specific aspects of them) for environmental and social management: 
Asbama, Asocaña, Fedearroz, the National Federation of Coffee Growers and Fedegan. However, it is important 
to point out that the capacities are not homogeneous within these associati ons. For this reason, the ESMF  defined 
that each farmer association must develop a plan to strengthen their capacities for environmental, social and gender 
management, which responds to their current status.  
150. Project -level grievance redress mechanism . For t he registration and reporting of Petitions, Complaints, 
Claims, Suggestions and Denunciations (PCCSD), the following measures are considered:  
• Online platform: The ESMP  includes the design and operation of an online platform for the project, which will 
include a section for registering the P CCSD that may be submitted. Users will be able to directly submit the 
PCCSD  for attention by project staff.  
• Document management: Eac h PCCSD will have a file number. The P CCSD can also be carried out directly 
through field personnel or through calls, physical mail, etc. The person in charge of document management of the ESMP team will register in the system.  
• Response and follow -up: The communication will be forwarded in a timely manner to the competent authority 
for processing and response. In the case of communications and PCCSD referred by women and ethnic groups, special attention will be paid. Periodic reports will be made on the mai n PCCSDs that are presented.  
151. The P CCSD Resolution Mechanism includes a classification of the complaint, according to its level of urgency, 
giving priority to the attention of complaints and claims that put the life and health of the most vulnerable populat ion 
at risk. According to the classification, the official/contractor who has the competence to attend to it will be reported immediately, who will identify the measures and corrective actions to address the situation. Subsequently, a formal 
response to th e claim will be given, specifying the actions and the person / s responsible for carrying them out. The 
maximum response times to the P CCSD will be 15 business days after receipt. If necessary, roundtables will be 
convened. Each P CCSD will be followed up a nd formally closed.  
152. Regarding stakeholder participation, 52 interviews and group sessions were carried out. Taking into account 
that the project is still in the structuring stage and that at the time of the consultations the formulation of the 
components and activities was still in the process of technical discussion, during the interviews a general description 
of CSICAP was made and subsequently inquired about the main strengths, possible obstacles and opportunities 
of the project, as well as recommendatio ns for socializing the project information and for efficient communication 
between actors, and to guarantee success in the inclusion of a gender approach and environmental management 
strategies in the project, among other aspects.  
153. To maintain interaction w ith the different stakeholders during project implementation, a stakeholder 
participation plan was formulated, which includes:  
• Start -up workshop.  
• Strategies in the GAP and ES MF that include participatory exercises (strategy of social appropriation of 
knowledge, work tables and spaces for discussion and collective construction of knowledge with producers, participatory work sessions with women) and interaction with interested part ies (Communications Plan, project 
web platform, biannual socialization events).  
• Complementary measures: definition of criteria for the selection of beneficiaries, celebration of initiation acts 
with rights and commitments of the beneficiaries, participation of beneficiaries in decision- making bodies of the 
project, management of alliances with strategic actors.  
154. Potential impacts on indigenous populations . The CSICAP project will not have a direct impact on collective 
territories (indigenous reservations and community councils), therefore it is not considered necessary to carry out 
prior consultation processes. However, with the aim of promoting the participation of ethnic producers in the project, 
the ethnic differential approach was included in the diagnosi s and analysis of risks, as well as in the mitigation


---
*Page 73*
---

G G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 71 OF 75 
   
 measures and in the dissemination and relationship processes that the Project will implement. CSICAP. 
Specifically, it is considered pertinent to take the following provisions:  
• Within the framework of t he strategy for the social appropriation of knowledge and the communications plan, 
recommendations will be incorporated to promote the participation of producers belonging to ethnic 
communities in the agricultural value  chains analyzed.  
• Include in the technical team of the project, especially in the group of extension workers, people belonging to 
ethnic communities in the project intervention areas, in such a way that trust is generated, work with the 
communities is facilitated at the same time local capaci ty. 
• In the chains that apply, it is recommended to propose a minimum participation percentage of producers 
belonging to ethnic communities in the project.  
• Incorporate the identification of producers who belong to ethnic communities in the information collection 
formats and in the farmer associations ' databases.  
• An orientation guide will be formulated with guidelines to advance in the incorporation of the differential 
approach in the internal policies and guidelines of the farmer associations  that participate in the project.  
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max.  500 words, approximately 1  page )


---
*Page 74*
---

G G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 72 OF 75 
   
 155. Development of the Gender Analysis and Gender Action Plan . The Gender Analysis carried out a 
comprehensive diagnosis with a gender perspective of the territories, the population and the agricul tural value  
chains that are the focus  of the CSICAP project, as well as the institutional, normative and policy framework 
associated with gender equality. The Gender Analysis was obtained from m ixed research methods and the 
triangulation of secondary and statistical information (population census, agricultural census, and quality of life, 
labor market and time use surveys), with primary information. The latter included the completion by the farmer 
associations  of an institutional capacity analysis form, as well as the development of interviews and group sessions 
with farmer associations  officials, extension workers, producers and affiliated producers (including people belonging 
to ethnic groups) a nd actors. institutional institutions of the national and local order.  
156. For the formulation of the Gender Action Plan, the gender approach was analyzed and mainstreamed in each 
of the components, axes and activities that comprise the CSICAP project. Based on the results of the Gender 
Analysis, the risks associated with gender were identified and, on the one hand, mitigation measures were 
formulated so that CSICAP does not widen the gender gaps, and, on the other hand, measures to promote gender 
equality in order for the project to contribute to reducing these gaps.  
157. Summary of Gender Analysis. The Gender Analysis identified that the gender division of work persists mainly 
in rural contexts; Consequently, housework and unpaid care work are activities that fall on rural women, which 
considerably limits their labor participation and permanence in the paid labor market and decision- making in relation 
to agricultural production units (UPA)34. Additionally, women farmers and ranchers have less access to producti ve 
factors, such as land, credit and technology, which reduces their production potential in crop chains, and limits local economic development.  
158. In response, the Gender Action Plan of the CSICAP Project seeks to reduce the barriers faced by women 
producers  who participate in the Project and will take advantage of it to identify opportunities, in an articulated  
manner between different actors, to favor a greater participation of rural women in the local productive development. 
In relation to the care economy
35 and women's rights, actions will be developed based on the 3R concept: i) 
Recognition through the sensitization of the different actors involved in CSICAP ( farmer associations  officials, 
extension workers) , ii) Reduction of the time that women dedicate to these activities, facilitating access to care 
services (promotion of pilot of nurseries, community washing machines, efficient stoves, among others) and iii) 
Redistribution of loads in the home (training to producers and agency promotion, participation and empowerment 
of women). In a complementary way, and to improve access to technology, technical assistance alternatives that 
favor women will be promoted (flexible hours, comprehensive assistance, "producer to producer" methodology, 
access to technologi es that reduce their workload, but increase productivity, among others).  
159. Likewise, a greater participation of women in the Project will be fostered, by taking advantage of economic 
opportunities along the links of the productive chains (for example, through the economic exploitation, by women, 
of species for the models). silvopastoral and agroforestry, which in turn can improve household food security). 
Similarly, the institutional capacities of the farmer associations  will be strengthened to promote gender equality from 
their mission, so that in this way they can have the necessary tools to implement the action plan.  
160. Consultations with interested parties . 52 interviews and group sessions were carried out, in which 205 
people participated: 131 men and 74 women, who were asked for recommendations to ensure success in including 
the gender approach in the project, among other aspects. The actors recommended characterizing the women 
beneficiaries to develop actions relevant to their needs, include affirmative measures, sensitize all actors on gender 
issues, promote activities exclusively for women and / or that are led by women, promote associativity and 
participation of women. These suggestions were incorporated into the act ions proposed in the GAP, several of 
which include participatory formulation processes (in field workshops) with women, in order for the project to have a “bottom- up” approach. Additionally, several of the actions will be implemented not only with the direct beneficiaries 
(women producers), but also with indirect ones (for example, from the households of the producers) in order to 
promote a greater participation of rural women in the project.  
161. The Project Management Unit will have a Gender Team, made up of a senior and a junior professional, who 
will be in charge of the design of guidelines, plans and strategies of the G AP, provide support and technical advice 
during implementation, monitor the progress and compliance as stipulated in the GAP, and support the review and 
update of the plan.  
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page)  
 
34 In CSICAP municipalities, on average, men make production decisions in 58.4% of UPAs, compared to 20.0% of UPAs where women m ake decisions, and 
15.3% where decisions are made in a shared way.  
35 Article 2 of Law 1413 of 201 0, defines the care economy as “unpaid work carried out in the home, related to the maintenance of the home, the care of othe r 
people in the home or the community and the maintenance of strength of paid work. " In the case of rural women, the effects of cl imate change are exacerbated 
by gender norms and relations in the home and on the farm. The overload of unpaid domestic and care work, as well as low part icipation in production decision-
making, low access and control over land and financial and technologi cal resources, and low income and high levels of poverty (especially in female heads of 
household), among other factors, limit the ability of women to develop adaptation strategies to climate variability. In addit ion, the effects on household food security  
can be deepened, because, on the one hand, the responsibility for the supply of food falls on them, and, on the other hand, c limate change can reduce the 
availability of water, food and resources for self -consumption.


---
*Page 75*
---

G G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 73 OF 75 
   
 162. Financial Management and Control . The MADR, as Executing Entity, will be responsible for supervising the 
implementation and supervision of the project, in accordance with its own internal rules, policies and procedures , 
including the administration and management of the use of GCF resour ces, as well as the follow -up, evaluation and 
reporting responsibilities. The loan resources will be administered according to the CAF Credit Process Manual 
(MN / DCRR - 017) that has been reviewed by the GCF during the CAF accreditation process. The Manual  guides 
the process for all phases of credit, including: (i) Origination; (ii) Evaluation; (iii) Approval; (iv) Formalization; and 
(v) Administration. The non -reimbursable resources of the GCF will be executed by the Government of Colombia, 
through MADR as  the Executing Agency, and CIAT, as the procured party . The Figure in this section shows the 
execution scheme of the GCF funds and how these would be handled by CAF as an accredited agency.  
 
 
  
Figure G.3.1. Flow chart, management and financial control of  the Project  
 
163. The financial control and procurement processes will be implemented in accordance with the rules and 
regulations of the CAF, which were certified in the accreditation process before the GCF. On the other hand, CIAT 
has an ERP UBW (Unit4 Business World) that allows it to separate projects through specific codes per signed 
agreement and monitor budget execution online, it also has logistics and travel modules that allow requests to be 
made to assistants and project leaders directly giving transparency to the execution of expenses through their 
approval workflows. CIAT handles the accrual accounting established in the procedures documented in Directive 
D 2.15. T he Alliance has an annual financial institutional review and audit process, through the External Audi tors, 
the CGIAR internal audit and, on occasions, if the donor requires it, the audit of specific projects that is carried out. 
by external auditors and negotiated as part of the audit plan in accordance with the requirements established in the 
signed agreements and with the budget availability within the agreement.  
164. During project execution, CAF will supervise and guarantee quality in accordance with its policies and 
procedures. This may include follow -up missions, spot checks, and participation in Steering Committee meetings. 
The project will be subject to the CAF audit regime, including external and internal audit functions. CIAT is 
responsible for financial monitoring and has the support of a financial management team, which will interact with 
and support  the work of the Executing Unit.  
165. Procurement . The Procurement Plan is aligned with that of CAF's Goods and Services Procurement Manual, 
following what is stipulated in CAF's Master Accreditation Agreement (AMA) with the GCF. Similarly, the financial 
manage ment policies of CIAT (the procured party ) are aligned with those of CAF to guarantee sound internal  
control. Procurement processes will follow CIAT's Procurement Manual for Goods, Consulting Services and Works, 
with the thresholds for procurement. CIAT guidelines will be used for the acquisition and contracting of goods. 
These guidelines have been included in Annex 10.


---
*Page 76*
---

G G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 74 OF 75 
   
 166. The Alliance of Bioversity International and CIAT has implemented an ERP (Agresso Unit4 Business World), 
which manages the procurement of goods and services. Its use improves the flow of information, supports the  
traceability of processes, facilitates reporting, increases transparency and strengthens internal control. Acquisitions 
comply with the Logistics Policy, which is  based on principles of fairness and competitiveness, transparency, 
quality, service, objective selection and reduction of legal risk. In addition, the guidelines set forth in the CGIAR 
Financial Guidelines Series (FG6) IFRS have been adapted to the proced ures of the Alliance.  
167. Due to the civil nature of the relationship with suppliers, they are required to assume all material, human and 
financial risks involved in acquisitions , thus avoiding risks to the Alliance. Therefore, in accordance with the nature, 
scope and purpose of the contracted good or service, contracts are signed in which providers are suggested to 
acquire the policies with the insurance broker of the Large Beneficiaries Program. Finally, in the contracts there are 
compromissory clauses are considered for the solution of differences, controversies or discrepancies that arise 
between the parties.  
 
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
☒ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☐ With confidential information:  The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the followi ng two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:  
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure polic y, and  
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.   
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 77*
---

H H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 75 OF 75 
   
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents.  
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory a nnexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no-objection letter(s)  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study , if applicable  
☒ Annex 3 Economic and /or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4 Detailed b udget  plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5 Implementation  timetable  including  key project/programme milestones  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):   
(ESS disclosu re form  provided)  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☐ Others (please specify  – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework,  
Indigenous People ’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc. ) 
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 1 0 Procurement plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 1 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 2 AE fee request (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 3 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☒ Annex 1 4 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and , if applicable , repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ Annex 1 5 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☒ Annex 1 6 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 1 7 Multi -country project/programme information (template provided)  
☐ Annex 1 8 Appraisal, d ue diligence or evaluation report  for proposals based on up -scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☒ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entitie s undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
☒ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☐ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☒ Annex 22 GHG Emissions Reduction Estimates  
☒ Annex 23  Other relevant reference: impact assessment baseline initiatives  (evaluation ex -post)  
☒ Annex 24  Other relevant reference : estimation of  direct and indirect beneficiaries  
☒ Annex 25  Operations and maintenance (O&M) plan  
☒ Annex 26  Annexes requested by iTAP


---
*Page 78*
---

No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 80*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  Climate -smart initiatives for climate change adaptation and 
sustainability in prioritized agricultural production systems in 
Colombia (CSICAP)  
Existence of subproject (s) 
to be identified after GCF 
Board approval  No 
Sector (public or private)  Public  
Accredited entity  Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Location – specific 
location (s) of project  or 
target country or 
location (s) of programme  Colombia  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, January 7, 2022  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  and Spanish  
Explanation on language  Spanish is the official language of Colombia and the language 
understandable to affected peoples/stakeholders . 
Link to disclosure  English:  
https://www.caf.com/media/3382061/en -2021 -04-29-
annex -6-esmf -rev011221 -clean.pdf    
 
Spanish:  
https://www.caf.com/media/3382057/2021 -03-31-anexo- 6-
esia -y-mgas -corto -26042021 -rev1 -12-2021 -clean.pdf   
Other link(s)   https://www.caf.com/es/temas/a/ambiente -y-cambio -
climatico/proyectos/  
Remarks  An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “ Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) ”. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, January 7, 2022  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  and Spanish  
Explanation on language  Spanish is the official language of Colombia and the language 
understandable to affected peoples/stakeholders . 
Link to disclosure  English:  
https://www.caf.com/media/3382061/en -2021 -04-29-
annex -6-esmf -rev011221 -clean.pdf   
 
Spanish:  
https://www.caf.com/media/3382057/2021 -03-31-anexo- 6-
esia -y-mgas -corto -26042021 -rev1 -12-2021 -clean.pdf    
Other link(s)   https://www.caf.com/es/temas/a/ambiente -y-cambio -
climatico/proyectos/  
Remarks  An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the ESMF .


---
*Page 81*
---

Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  on 
accredited entity’s website  Environmental and Social Risk Assessment  of the project is 
contained in the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) , Gender Assessment (GA) and Gender 
Action Plan (GAP) /  
Friday, January 7, 2022  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  and Spanish  
Explanation on language  Spanish is the official language of Colombia and the language 
understandable to affected peoples/stakeholders . 
Link to disclosure  English:  
- ESMF  https://www.caf.com/media/3382061/en -2021 -04-
29-annex -6-esmf -rev011221 -clean.pdf   
- GA https://www.caf.com/media/3382062/en -2021 -03-31-
annex -8-gender -assessment -rev-19-11-21-clean.pdf   
-GAP https://www.caf.com/media/3382060/en -2021 -03-31-
annex -8-gap-rev-19-11-2021 -clean.pdf   
 
Spanish:  
- ESMF https://www.caf.com/media/3382057/2021 -03-31-
anexo -6-esia -y-mgas -corto -26042021 -rev1 -12-2021 -
clean.pdf  
- GA https://www.caf.com/media/3382058/2021 -03-31-
anexo -8-analisis -de-genero -rev-19-11-2021 -clean.pdf  
- GAP https://www.caf.com/media/3382059/2021 -03-31-
anexo -8-pag-rev19 -11-2021 -clean.pdf  
Other link(s)  English https://www.caf.com/en/topics/e/environment -and-
climate -change/projects/  
Spanish https://www.caf.com/es/temas/a/ambiente -y-
cambio -climatico/proyectos/  
Remarks  N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date  Friday, January 7, 2022  
Place  Hard copies were  made available in CAF´s office in Colombia 
located in Carrera 9 #76 -49, Bogota D.C . 
CP 110221  
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  Monday, June 6, 2022  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  Monday, February 7, 2022  
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 82*
---

 
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01 
Page 82 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP182 
Proposal name: Climate-smart initiatives for climate change adaptation and 
sustainability in prioritized agricultural production systems 
in Colombia (CSICAP) 
Accredited entity: Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF) 
Country/(ies): Colombia 
Programme/programme size: Medium 
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat 
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks: 
Strengths Points of caution 
Modernization of agricultural extension services 
and adaptation decision-making at the producer 
level with cutting-edge technologies, including 
artificial intelligence and big data. Relatively high staff costs for scientists and 
technicians and a need to ensure that funding is 
used to build the capacity of local actors. 
Great potential to attract the private sector in the 
targeted agricultural value chains (eight crops 
and livestock) with active financial actors already 
in place with high demands from local, national 
and international markets.  
High potential for further scaling up and 
replication to other gremios (farmer producer 
groups) once the innovative business models have 
been developed and proven to be successful 
through output 3.1.  
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum V, titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations.”  
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment 
2.1 Project background  
3. The agricultural sector in Colombia has been negatively affected by climate change. Its 
production, yields, land suitability and harvest seasons have all been impacted by higher 
temperatures, rainfall variability, droughts and a higher frequency of extreme weather events. 
Projections show that 26 out of 32 Colombian departments are likely to see large yield losses for 
basic crops associated with food security. Farmers in the regions are not adequately adapting to 
these climate impacts, owing to costly adaptation technologies, limited knowledge and lack of 
timely agroclimatic information to help them cope with changing weather patterns and extreme 
weather events.


---
*Page 83*
---

 
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01 
Page 83 
 
 
4. The objectives of the project are to change the current paradigm of agricultural 
production of intensive use of conventional agricultural inputs with little adaptation techniques, 
and to reduce the vulnerability of crops to droughts, floods and other climatic stressors through 
adopting digital agriculture and adaptation technologies. The project will generate adequate 
and stable availability of good-quality food by strengthening climate risk management, while 
reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from agricultural production. In addition, the project 
will strengthen the capacities of producers, technicians and institutions so that they can adopt 
and implement technologies. The project is national in scope, and it considers livestock and 
eight crops – rice, corn, potatoes, sugarcane, panela sugarcane, coffee, bananas and plantains. 
5. The project will contribute to directly benefitting 619,691 rural producers and their 
families (7 per cent of total agricultural producers in Colombia), and an additional 347,996 
people indirectly through the provision of climate information services. It is also expected to 
increase the climate resilience of the agricultural system across a total of 967,997 hectares, 
distributed in 22 departments (69 per cent of the country’s departments) and 219 
municipalities (20 per cent of all municipalities). The project is projected to reduce GHG 
emissions by 9,152,034 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO 2eq) throughout its 25-year 
lifespan. 
6. The total project financing is USD 99,910,201, with a request for GCF financing of USD 
73,283,080 (grant USD 48,283,080 and loan USD 25,000,000). Corporación Andina de Fomento 
(CAF) contributes to the project with a senior loan of USD 10,300,000, and co-financing of USD 
16,300,000 will be provided by the institutions and entities involved in the project, such as the 
alliance between Biodiversity International and the International Center for Tropical 
Agriculture (CIAT) and the farmer groups (guilds or “ gremios”). The project is submitted under 
environmental and social safeguards category B. 
2.2 Component-by-component analysis  
Component 1: Digital agriculture and climate services for rural modernization with an emphasis 
on adaptation and mitigation (total cost: USD 39.615 million; GCF cost: USD 26.045 million, or 66 
per cent) 
7. Component 1 aims to improve decision-making at the producer level and avoid crop 
losses through the adoption of digital agriculture, including the use of big data and artificial 
intelligence. It includes the design, assembly, implementation and operation of climate 
information services for technicians and producers. In addition, this component includes early 
warning systems on climate hazards, as well as other sophisticated warning systems on pests, 
diseases and other abiotic factors that can occur due to climatic phenomena.  
8. Under this component, GCF grants and loans will be used to strengthen and modernize 
the agricultural extension system, and to provide information services to reduce agroclimatic 
risk. The component seeks to modernize and expand the coverage of agricultural extension in 
Colombia. More than 2,200 technicians will be trained in using this type of tool, and the 
component will ensure there is technical support covering the implementation and adaptation 
and mitigation measures delivered to about 49,200 producers, who are considered direct 
project beneficiaries.  
9. This component shows the key paradigm-shift potential in the proposed project, by 
bringing in cutting-edge technologies to extension services and farming activities. Adopting 
artificial intelligence with big data platforms will make it possible to automate crop cycle 
monitoring and data management, and to produce automatic responses in extension services. 
The feasibility study assesses the advantages of several proposed technologies compared with 
conventional statistical methods, and provides sound justification for discarding the 
conventional methods and opting for the proposed solutions. The target production sites are


---
*Page 84*
---

 
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01 
Page 84 
 
 
well equipped to implement the proposed solutions because such systems are not entirely new 
for some of the crops (e.g. rice and cotton). The proposal also shows that sufficient technical 
capacity is in place from both CIAT and Agricultural Research Corporation of Colombia 
(Agrosavia) to carry out the project activities. 
10. The project is structured so that minimum concessionality is sought to make the 
investments viable with the participation of both the private and public sector. As demonstrated 
in the financial model, reducing the concessionality would make the project unviable. When 
reducing the grant amount by a third, for instance, it would make the project unviable for 
certain gremios (i.e. livestock and sugar cane). At reduced levels of grants, the model shows that 
the project is not viable for most of the gremios. This demonstrates that the concessionality in 
this project, including components 2 and 3, mainly benefits the producer associations, which in 
turn have committed to provide co-financing so that the project’s objectives are met.  
Component 2: Genetic improvement, crop management techniques and other technological options 
and their scaling up to increase climate resilience and promote low-carbon agricultural 
development (total cost: USD 48.025 million; GCF cost: USD 37.362 million, or 78 per cent) 
11. Component 2 will improve the resilience of productive systems and promote low-carbon 
agricultural development, and considers alternatives for genetic improvement by developing 
new varieties and hybrids that are more resilient to climate impacts, efficient use of water 
resources and soil, and other adaptation and mitigation options. This component comprises two 
thematic outputs with their corresponding activities: (i) strengthening the germplasm bank, 
developing new varieties, and supporting the massive multiplication of seeds for adaptation and 
mitigation; and (ii) crop management techniques and other technological options and their 
scaling up to increase resilience and mitigation.  
12. Under this component, GCF grants and loans will be used to develop a state-of-the-art 
phenotyping platform designed to identify climate-resistant genetic resources aimed at 
developing heat- and drought-resistant, nitrogen-use efficient and low-GHG emission varieties 
for rice, maize, bananas, sugarcane, panela sugarcane, coffee, potatoes and livestock. Also, GCF 
funding will be used for implementing a range of crop management techniques on 9,230 
hectares of land to increase the efficient use of water resources, restore soil properties, reduce 
GHG emissions or increase carbon capture, while enabling productivity increases. 
13. The proposal provides sound justification for the need of a germplasm bank and 
development of new varieties that are resilient to climate change, with several alternative 
options assessed in the feasibility study. There are limited options available in the market in 
terms of genetic materials, and other solutions such as whole breeding cycle would take a 
longer time than the project period. A phenotyping platform would thus be the most cost-
effective and feasible solution to develop climate-resistant genetic resources. 
14. The proposed crop management techniques and technologies are well known and 
recognized agricultural practices that will produce no-regret results. These techniques will be 
tailored to the needs of the various crops. The feasibility study presents the detailed steps 
needed for implementing these agronomic measures, including methods to monitor the GHG 
emission reductions achieved through implementing such techniques. The proposed 
interventions, their rationale and the steps for implementation are assessed to be adequate and 
reasonable to achieve the project objectives. 
Component 3: Innovative and inclusive business models through modernized innovation systems 
and a more engaged financial sector (total cost: USD 8.571 million; GCF cost: USD 7.169 million, or 
84 per cent) 
15. Component 3 aims to develop science-based business models that will enable prioritized 
value chains to open new commercial opportunities. The component will also transfer 
modernized technical assistance and agricultural extension services to 2,200 trainees under


---
*Page 85*
---

 
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01 
Page 85 
 
 
component 1. The component is expected to generate eight business models (one per gremio) 
and involve at least four financial institutions (banks, microfinance institutions, insurance 
companies and so on), incentivizing them to design tailored financial products for the target 
agricultural value chains. 
16. The business model development under this component has been strengthened after 
extensive reviews conducted during the second-level due diligence. The outputs of this 
component will include detailed value chain analyses for the target crops, strengthening the 
gremios’ capacities to use adopted digital tools, and developing low-carbon and climate-resilient 
business models for the key value chains. As presented in the feasibility study, there are already 
well-functioning domestic and international markets with active public and private sectors, 
including various lending opportunities with financial actors. This output should therefore focus 
on developing differentiated business models that integrate the technological solutions in 
agricultural planning and production, providing new commercial opportunities for the private 
sector in the target value chains. 
Project management (total cost: USD 3.692 million; GCF cost: USD 2.704 million, or 73 per cent)  
17. The GCF portion of the project management cost is about 3.7 per cent of the total 
requested GCF funding and is compliant with the GCF policy on fees. 
III. Assessment of performance against investment criteria 
3.1 Impact potential                 Scale: Medium to high  
18. The project is cross-cutting, aiming to generate both adaptation and mitigation results. 
The project has substantial mitigation potential, with 9.1 MtCO 2eq in emission reductions and 
carbon sequestration over the 25-year project lifetime (0.37 MtCO 2eq per year). The emission 
reductions and carbon sequestration will be achieved through rice cultivation (reduction of 
methane emissions); efficient use of fertilizers; implementing efficient stoves; and applying bio-
inputs as well as other adaptation techniques. The baseline emission values for each crop, as 
well as calculation of emission reductions, are in accordance with the guidelines for emissions 
inventories in agricultural systems published by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change. 
19. Adaptation impact is deemed to be significant: the number of direct beneficiaries is 7.2 
per cent of the total producer population in Colombia, and the scope of the project is national , 
with the project’s target departments accounting for close to 70 per cent of the country 
departments. The project areas have been targeted on the basis of their climate risks and 
mitigation potential, and agreed among project stakeholders including gremios. Rigorous 
eligibility criteria for selecting project sites, activities and beneficiaries have been submitted as 
part of the funding proposal package and they are included in the term sheet. 
20. As the project scope is at the national level, the climate rationale for the adaptation 
interventions has been demonstrated in rather a generic manner. Colombia has been 
experiencing an average temperature increase of 0.13°C per decade between 1971 and 2000, 
and will continue to be affected by higher temperature, intense rain and drought, and a higher 
frequency of extreme weather events. The proposal lacks observed historical trends for each 
identified climate parameter from location-specific representative meteorological stations. 
While efforts have been made to identify a link between El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) 
and agricultural productivity in Colombia, the proposal needs to strengthen its information on 
the observable long-term trend between identified parameters and agricultural productivity. 
3.2 Paradigm shift potential           Scale: Medium


---
*Page 86*
---

 
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01 
Page 86 
 
 
21. The key paradigm shifting potential in this project is from technological innovation and 
transfer, whereby digital agriculture (including big data and a bot-based system) will be used 
for agroclimatic forecasting and for selecting the most suitable adaptation measures for 
producers. The proposal demonstrates high potential for scaling up and replication for the 
proposed digital agriculture system. As the project itself is a scaling up of the pilot project 
implemented by CIAT and the Colombian Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 
(MADR), substantial groundwork has already been done (e.g. the big data platform is already set 
up for rice, maize and sugarcane), and the project will scale up the system for other crops 
(potatoes, sugarcane, bananas, and livestock).  
22. The proposal presents a detailed market analysis for each target crop and each gremio, 
in both domestic and international markets. It shows how the proposed project will remove 
existing financial and socioeconomic barriers to access to markets and amplify income 
opportunities for the guilds. The project proposal shows there is a high degree of potential to 
change incentives for market participants by reducing costs and risks, and by eliminating 
barriers to the deployment of adaptation technologies. 
23. The proposal presents a solid financial exit strategy with an operations and 
maintenance plan as part of the annexes. The various assets to be created (e.g. big data 
platforms) will be operated and maintained by the gremios, while the public goods will be 
incorporated into Agrosavia’s extension systems. Co-financing of USD 16 million from all the 
participating gremios demonstrates their willingness and ownership of the proposed project. 
The financial analysis of the proposal also shows profitability of the investment for farmers, 
with concessional financing from GCF and CAF, ensuring the sustainability of the farming 
activities with adaptation technologies after project completion. 
3.3 Sustainable development potential       Scale: Medium  
24. The proposal provides sound justification for its potential to generate positive 
environmental externalities. The project will contribute to soil conservation, improved 
sustainability of land management, improved tree coverage, and carbon sequestration through 
various soil and water conservation techniques. The project will not introduce any genetically 
modified organisms and invasive species, and will abide to strict regulations regarding the use 
of chemical fertilizers and pesticides, as provided in the environmental and social management 
framework (annex 6 to the proposal). 
25. The project is expected to produce positive economic and social benefits. It will increase 
household income from agricultural production by 14.6 per cent, as captured in the logical 
framework, and increased food security will deliver health and nutritional improvements for 
the target farmer families. The proposal also provides other economic and social co-benefits 
that have not been quantified. 
26. Gender considerations have been included in the project design with an emphasis on 
reducing barriers for women producers to participate in local development. A detailed gender 
assessment and action plan has been developed and was submitted as annex 8 to the proposal. 
3.4  Needs of the recipient                   Scale: Medium  
27. The vulnerability of the country and the target beneficiaries and their adaptation needs 
are generally explained throughout the proposal, but without detailed descriptions of the scale 
and intensity of the country’s exposure to climate risks. The impacts of climate change, 
including incidents resulting in droughts and flooding, on agricultural production and 
livelihoods are presented. The vulnerability of farmer groups, including women, is


---
*Page 87*
---

 
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01 
Page 87 
 
 
acknowledged, especially with regard to their food insecurity as presented in the funding 
proposal. 
28. Colombia is classified as an upper middle-income country. However, the proposal makes 
a case that the proposed interventions and the initial cost of technology adoption, require 
concessional financing to make the project viable. As the gremios do not have financial capacity 
to adopt the required technologies, the Government of Colombia is taking low concessional 
sovereign loans to support the adoption of low-carbon and climate-resilient agricultural 
technologies. 
29. The proposal explains the needs of the recipient based on the absence of alternative 
financing. Although such justification is acknowledged, the justification could have been 
strengthened by providing a wider investment strategy, including a financial estimation of the 
cost of implementing climate change adaptation measures in agriculture at the national level, 
and the associated shortfalls in the national budget. Such an exercise would have provided a 
clear road map or pathway for climate resilience-building in the sector from a financial 
perspective and would clarify the level of contribution from GCF. 
3.5 Country ownership               Scale: High  
30. The proposal demonstrates that the project is aligned with policies and strategies at 
both the national and the sectoral level, including with the country’s nationally determined 
contribution. The proposal makes it clear which objective the proposed project will contribute 
to in its national and sectoral strategies.  
31. The project will be implemented by two executing entities (EEs): the Ministry of Finance 
and Public Credit (MHCP) which will be in charge of channelling GCF grants and loans, and 
MADR which will be responsible for technical implementation of the project, supported by CIAT. 
CAF, as the accredited entity (AE), submitted a financial management capacity assessment of the 
EEs and CIAT. MADR and CIAT have track records of implementing similar projects in other 
regions of the country, with comparable sizes of investments. 
32. The project was designed on the basis of rigorous consultations with relevant 
stakeholders, including the GCF national designated authority, civil society organizations, 
indigenous peoples, women and other vulnerable groups, and all the stakeholders involved in 
this project. A stakeholder consultation report was submitted as part of the funding proposal 
(annex 7). 
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                          Scale: High  
33. The project is highly efficient with a GCF cost of USD 1.45 per tCO 2eq, which is assessed 
to be efficient compared with benchmarks of similar investments in similar regional contexts. 
The project will leverage USD 26.6 million from the co-financiers, with a co-financing ratio of 
1:0.36. 
34. The proposed structure, with a mix of GCF grants and loans, is assessed to be adequate 
and reasonable. The AE developed nine financing mix scenarios resulting in various outcomes 
for the profitability of the activities considered for each producer organization. The scenarios 
consider different combinations of loans from GCF, CAF and commercial sources, and assess 
reductions in grant amount of 35 and 75 per cent. The GCF and CAF loan mixture scenario 
shows that a reduction of 35 per cent of grant component leads to only one out of eight value 
chains not profitable, while when the grant element is reduced by 75 per cent, four out of eight 
value chains are not profitable. The model demonstrates that the grant component is more 
important for the concessionality of the instruments than the loan component in the 
profitability of the interventions for each producer association.


---
*Page 88*
---

 
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01 
Page 88 
 
 
35. The proposal demonstrates its cost-effectiveness using a well-established financial 
modelling methodology. Project internal rate of return (IRR) is estimated at 24 per cent overall 
or twice the 12 per cent social discount rate used by the AE. The model also estimates IRRs for 
each value chain or each gremio with economic IRRs ranging from 17 to 29 per cent. The net 
present value for the eight crop models stands at USD 3.3 billion with technology adoption. The 
model overall shows that the project is financially viable with GCF concessional financing. 
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards 
36. Project background . The project aims to develop, validate, and implement new low-
emission and resilient technologies and to scale up existing technologies such as genetic 
improvements, crop management techniques and other technological options. These actions are 
to be supported by the implementation and operation of climate information services that will 
be available to various stakeholders and decision-makers. Among the environmental and social 
co-benefits are improved tree cover and soil conservation, sustainable land management, and 
carbon sequestration through implementation of various soil and water conservation strategies. 
Among the social benefits are improved health and nutrition as a result of resilient food supply, 
particularly during climate-induced natural events. 
37. Environmental and social risk category and safeguard instruments . The project is 
classified as Category B because the project will potentially have limited adverse environmental 
and social risks and/or impacts which are site-specific, largely reversible and can be mitigated 
with appropriate environmental and social management measures. An environmental and social 
assessment is included in the ESMF that has been prepared for the project. The Secretariat 
confirms that the risk category is aligned with GCF environmental and social risk categorization 
and is within the risk accreditation level of the AE.  
38. Compliance with the GCF environmental and social safeguards standards . The 
paragraphs below summarize the project’s compliance with GCF ESS standards and 
requirements.  
39. ESS 1: Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and impacts. The 
project has submitted an ESMF, which included an environmental and social risk assessment 
and management measures as provided in the included environmental and social management 
plan (ESMP). The risk assessment was undertaken considering the nature, magnitude, 
extent/location, permanence, duration, reversibility and significance of the risks/impacts and 
assessed as either low, moderate or high. The results of the environmental and social risk 
assessment are presented and an ESMP is proposed that identifies potential impact areas, 
required mitigation measures, and responsibilities of stakeholders, among other things. The 
ESMP is built on the assumptions that the project will comply with applicable national laws, 
regulations and standards for the protection of the environment and communities as well as 
that of the AE’s and GCF ESS. Regarding the potential for conflicts – such as territorial conflicts, 
armed conflict as well as between beneficiary and non-beneficiary conflicts that may be 
generated between selected producers and those who may not be selected as beneficiaries of 
the project – these will be mitigated as part of the site selection where the security and conflict 
situation will be thoroughly assessed, and low-risk areas will be prioritized and selected for 
project implementation. 
40. ESS 2: Labour and working conditions. Potential workers that may be hired by the 
project (including day labourers, jornaleros) will be engaged under the terms and conditions of 
the current labour law in the country. Although farmers will be mostly beneficiaries, should 
farmers also be hired, the same terms and conditions will be applied. The project will also


---
*Page 89*
---

 
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01 
Page 89 
 
 
ensure that there is appropriate occupational health and safety management for the workers – 
following good international industry practices – to consider issues such as labourers’ working 
conditions, terms of employment, workers organization, non-discrimination, equal opportunity, 
child labour, and forced labour of direct and indirect employees, including contracted and third-
party workers. 
41. ESS 3: Resource efficiency and pollution prevention. The project generally seeks to 
reduce and make more efficient use of resources including agrochemicals and pesticides, 
although health risks associated with the use of pesticides and chemical inputs in the 
production process may still continue to occur. The activities of the project aim to reduce the 
use of these inputs, especially pesticides, in the value chains and to employ more sustainable 
agriculture practices. Each of the implementing partners will also be assessed and required to 
have a comprehensive solid waste management plan to manage project-associated waste 
streams. The project will also promote the implementation of low water consumption 
technologies and develop guidelines for the efficient use of water resources on farms. 
42. ESS 4: Community health, safety and security. As indicated above, areas with security 
and conflict situations will be assessed and avoided as necessary. Regarding community health 
and safety, each of the implementing partners will be required to have an occupational health 
and safety plan to manage the risks to people and the environment. Additionally, farmers will 
received training on the proper use of pesticides and chemical inputs, as part of the training and 
capacity-building on good agricultural practices. 
43. ESS 5: Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement. The AE stipulated that the project 
will have no interventions that will require the displacement of people, either physically or 
economically, including potential involuntary restrictions on land use and access to natural 
resources that may result in the communities losing access to these resources for their 
livelihoods and other economic activities. This is also highlighted in the project’s ESMF. Formal 
agreements between project beneficiaries and implementing partners will also be acquired. 
44. ESS 6: Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural 
resources. The project’s activities under component 2 will promote management practices and 
other technical options that will increase resilience through agroforestry arrangements, rational 
use of fertilizers and bioproducts, optimization of irrigation systems, implementing 
conservation agriculture using harvest residues, and implementing landscape-level 
conservation and restoration strategies. This includes adopting restoration guidelines published 
by the Ministry of Environment which prioritizes use of native species. Regarding the potential 
for introducing genetically modified organisms (GMOs), the AE stipulated that the project will 
not introduce any GMOs and invasive species, and that the project will comply with existing 
national regulations regarding restrictions and the permit system. The AE also stated that 
attention will be paid to interventions (e.g. in potato and livestock value chains) that will be 
carried out in surrounding areas of moorland ecosystems, such as prohibiting the use of heavy 
machinery in agricultural activities; the final disposal, management and burning of solid and/or 
hazardous waste; the introduction and management of GMOs and invasive species; and burning, 
logging and fumigation and spraying of chemicals. The project will also explore relationships 
with various conservation-focused institutions to establish partnerships on knowledge and 
information relating to ecosystem services, biodiversity and sustainable practices that are 
beneficial to the stakeholders of the project, particularly on managing potential negative 
impacts of agricultural and livestock activities in the delimited moorland areas (“paramos”), 
among others.  
45. GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS 7 : Indigenous peoples. The AE confirmed that 
the project will not have a direct impact on indigenous peoples and their territories. To 
encourage the participation of producers from ethnic groups in the project, the ethnic 
differential approach is included in the baseline, the risk assessment, and the mitigation 
measures, and as well as in the disclosure and engagement processes to be implemented by the


---
*Page 90*
---

 
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01 
Page 90 
 
 
project. Specific measures to achieve this ethnic differential approach are: including people 
from ethnic communities in the project’s intervention areas and in the project’s technical team, 
especially in the group of extension workers, to build trust and facilitate work with the 
communities while building local capacity; identifying producers from ethnic communities in 
the information-gathering forms and the databases of the producer associations; and preparing 
a guideline to advance the incorporation of the ethnic differential approach in the internal 
policies of the producer associations participating in the project. If in the future the project 
directly affects indigenous peoples the project will only proceed in accordance with the GCF 
Indigenous Peoples Policy and domestic law. 
46. ESS 8: Cultural heritage. The ESMF indicates that the project could have adverse impacts 
on cultural heritage in the project sites, specifically regarding the potential for “loss of cultural 
diversity due to limited recognition of local knowledge and traditional productive practices, 
such as community seed storage/banks, among others, related to the project´s value chains”. 
The project plans to mitigate this through “social appropriation of knowledge” that will 
recognize and document “existing traditional practices, especially in the potato, corn, sugar cane 
value chains”. The project’s physical interventions will, however, be implemented in farm areas 
that have already been cultivated with conventional agriculture; thus the project’s activities are 
not expected to have adverse impacts, particularly on physical cultural resources. In the very 
remote possibility that these occur, the project will follow the guidelines on cultural heritage of 
the current laws of Colombia. 
47. Implementation arrangements . The project will have a project management unit that 
will be responsible for implementing the project’s ESMF. This will be coordinated with various 
stakeholders such as through CIAT, the producer associations, Agrosavia, and other 
implementing partners. The project management unit will also have an environmental, social 
and gender team that will oversee the technical requirements of the project, such as designing 
guidelines, plans and strategies for the ESMF; providing support during implementation, 
monitoring progress and compliance; and supporting the review and updating of the ESMF. The 
ESMF will also be made part of the documents of the call for proposals throughout the life cycle 
of the project to ensure that effective implementation of the ESMF and adequately management 
of the adverse impacts of the project’s activities at each stage of the project implementation. 
48. Stakeholder engagement and grievance redress mechanism (GRM) . The project has 
conducted interviews and group sessions with stakeholders in the formulation process of the 
ESMF. A stakeholders’ participation plan has also been developed that provides details about 
the kick-off workshop, participation strategies, and complementary measures and mechanisms 
to disseminate the plan. The plan likewise proposes mechanisms to maximize beneficiary 
participation in decision-making bodies such as the technical committees. The project will 
further design and implement a communications plan to ensure that workshops and other 
information dissemination and socialization strategies are further defined, prepared, convened 
and organized. The project will also establish a GRM that will address issues and complaints that 
may arise in the implementation of the project. It includes step-by-step procedures, responsible 
parties and timelines that are aimed at addressing grievances to be resolved promptly and 
effectively. 
4.2 Gender policy 
49. The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan, and therefore 
complies with the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy. 
50. The gender assessment provided illustrates the existence of an enabling environment 
that is conducive to the pursuit of gender equality and women’s empowerment. Colombia has 
ratified important international instruments and its Constitution guarantees equal rights and 
opportunities to women and men. The laws enacted dictate equal opportunities for women as


---
*Page 91*
---

 
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01 
Page 91 
 
 
well as guarantees that women live free of violence, while the country includes the care 
economy in its national accounts system. Colombia also has a national public policy on gender 
equity with the view to guarantee rights to women as well as the mainstreaming of gender 
issues in all sectors of the economy.  
51. The gender assessment provided by the AE was compiled on the basis of desk reviews 
and stakeholder consultations with female producers and associations. The assessment 
included an institutional capacity analysis, as well as discussions with association officials, 
extensionists, affiliated female and male producers, and institutional actors. The assessment 
indicates that rural women are disproportionately affected by climate change and their 
situation is exacerbated by the gender norms and relations in the household and on the farm. 
Compared with men, women have lower engagement in production-related decision-making, 
have low access to and control over land and financial and technological resources, and 
therefore have lower incomes and face higher levels of poverty, particularly female-headed 
households. Women more than men are responsible and burdened with domestic and unpaid 
care work, with women spending approximately 8 hours a day on such tasks, compared with 3 
hours by men. These realities limit women’s ability to develop adaptation strategies to manage 
and cope with climate-induced vulnerabilities, and contribute to the deepening of food 
insecurity as well as water and resource constraints.  
52. Further, in the agriculture sector, women producers face challenges in getting access to 
productive assets such as land, technical assistance and credit. These challenges are seen in the 
value chains of the eight crops that are the focus of this project as well. The banana, corn, rice, 
livestock, and potato chains have the lowest proportion of production units headed by women 
(less than 20 per cent and, in the case of bananas, the figure does not exceed 10 per cent). The 
issue is not only that women lack access to land but it is also the size of land they own or 
manage, which is on average 72.9 per cent of the size of the land owned by men (the greatest 
differences are found mainly in the cattle chain, where it is only 41 per cent). Access to credit is 
an issue for women and men alike, with under 20 per cent of people – regardless of the crop – 
able to receive some method of financing for production. Most of the producer associations also 
reflect the existing disparities in the participation and benefit of women. The associations lack 
capacity, awareness, institutional mechanisms and instruments to identify and address the 
challenges faced by women in the sector.  
53. The AE has provided a gender action plan and therefore complies with the requirement 
of the GCF Gender Policy. The gender action plan contains activities, targets, indicators, budget, 
timelines (by way of schedule and annual budget) and gender experts to support with the 
implementation of the gender action plan and to mainstream gender across the project. The 
implementation of the gender action plan will also involve the Ministry of Agriculture’s Rural 
Women’s Directorate. The activities included in the gender action plan will address the issues 
raised in the assessment, thereby promoting gender equality in systems and institutions. It will 
ensure men and women producers have equal access to information on seasonal climate 
forecasts in agriculture and that access to women producers for agricultural extension services 
is made possible. It will work towards ensuring changes and improvements in the number of 
women with decision-making roles, thereby making women beneficiaries leaders in the process 
of implementing CSICAP’s plans and activities for the conservation, preservation and 
restoration of strategic areas and ecosystems (e.g. fertilizers and bioproducts for the 
management of pests and diseases, led by women farmers’ groups and/or organizations). To 
address capacity and training opportunity gaps, the project will target training for women and 
will disseminate modules for young rural women on primary processing, management and 
marketing, among other topics. It will reduce structural barriers to women by making access to 
credit easier, ensuring women participate in farmers’ groups or organizations and ensuring 
women’s engagement in the boards of directors of the producer associations. Acknowledging 
the importance and burden of care work on women, the project will work on ensuring the 
availability of local care services while at the same time raising awareness of gender issues and


---
*Page 92*
---

 
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01 
Page 92 
 
 
gender-based violence among both women and men. The latter could also be reported using the 
project-level grievance redress mechanism, which will focus on complaints from women and 
ethnic groups.  
54. The activities included in the gender action plan are intended to empower women and 
the community at large by providing women with training, access to information on agricultural 
value chains, agroclimatic information, information and communication techniques, and 
mechanisms for the prevention of violence against women, while also creating an enabling 
environment for women to participate more in decision-making and sustainable practices on 
agricultural value chain issues. These activities are also expected to support women to improve 
their productivity, sphere of influence and capacity in the agricultural sector, as well as to 
increase their incomes. 
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1. Overall programme assessment (medium risk)   
55. The objective of the project is to reduce the vulnerability of agricultural production to 
climatic threats, to minimize the impacts of those threats on the competitiveness of the 
agricultural sector, and to have an adequate and stable availability of quality food by 
strengthening climate risk management, while reducing GHG emissions from agricultural 
production. CAF is the AE of the project and the Government of Columbia will be the EE. The 
GCF financing consists of (i) a sovereign loan to the Government of Columbia of up to USD 
25million and up to USD 48.3 million in grants. The AE will co-finance a loan of USD 10 million 
and grants will be provided by local producer associations totalling USD 16.3 million. Both the 
reimbursable and non-reimbursable funds provided by the GCF and the AE will be used by the 
EE to provide grants to the beneficiaries. 
56. The project comprises three components: (i) digital agriculture and climate services for 
rural modernization with an emphasis on adaptation and mitigation; (ii) Genetic improvement, 
crop management techniques and other technological options and their scaling up to increase 
climate resilience and promote low-carbon agricultural development; and (iii) innovative and 
inclusive business models through modernized innovation systems and a more engaged 
financial sector.  
4.3.2. Accredited entity/executing entity’s capability to execute the current programme 
(medium risk) 
57. The CAF is the AE for the project. CAF is rated A+ by Standard & Poor’s and Fitch. CAF 
has a local presence in Columbia and nearly 11 per cent of CAFs portfolio (at year end 2019) is 
located in Columbia. CAF has two approved GCF projects totalling over USD 230 million in 
project value. The Government of Columbia is a shareholder of the AE. 
58. The Government of Colombia will be the EE and will be the entity responsible for the 
project resources through MHCP, both credit and grant resources from the GCF and resources 
provided by the AE. MADR will be responsible for executing the project resources and technical 
implementation. 
4.3.3. Project-specific execution risks (medium risk) 
59. Demand risk: the success of the project depends on the demand of local farmers for the 
new technologies. Low uptake could result in project delays or lower-than-expected impacts. 
This risk is partially mitigated by (i) involving farmer organizations; and (ii) the relatively high 
expected IRRs providing financial incentives for uptake by farmers.


---
*Page 93*
---

 
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01 
Page 93 
 
 
60. Credit risk: The GCF and AE will be exposed to repayment risk for the sovereign loan to 
Columbia. Columbia is rated BB+ by Standard & Poor’s and Fitch. The AE will be the lender of 
record and enjoys de facto preferred creditor status. Historically, none of the AE’s sovereign 
loans have ever been placed in non-accrual status or been written off. 
61. Operations and maintenance (O&M) risk: after the implementation period of the project 
the O&M costs and insurance will not by covered by the project but by the producer 
associations. Project success will therefore depend on the continued capability of the producer 
associations to support these costs. Creation of O&M plans and technical support to the 
producer associations is part of the project.  
62. Delay and cost escalation: as result of lack of supply or increased price of inputs, human 
resources and tools, delays and costs escalation might occur, reducing the impact of the project. 
Currency fluctuations can also result in changes in costs. Comfort can be derived from 
contingencies in the budget and envisioned in the project planning. 
4.3.4. Project viability and concessionality 
63. GCF will provide both grants and low concessional loans. The EE will use both 
reimbursable and non-reimbursable funds to provide grants to beneficiaries. The economic and 
financial analysis shows a high average IRR of 201 per cent for the beneficiaries, suggesting that 
there is potential for reflows and therefore reduced amounts of grants from GCF. The AE 
considers that reimbursable instruments are not viable because investments are mostly public 
goods and not owned by the farmers.  
4.3.5. GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)  
64. In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of result area and single proposal is not material. 
4.3.6. Compliance risk (medium risk)  
65. The recipient country, Colombia, is not subject to United Nations Security Council 
restrictive measures. The AE has performed due diligence on the two EEs –MHCP and MADR – 
and has determined a medium risk when it comes to their ability to mitigate money laundering, 
terrorist financing and prohibited practices risks. In addition, the AE has undertaken due 
diligence on CIAT and did not identify any red flags that would prevent CIAT from fulfilling its 
responsibilities in the funded activity. The AE has also performed a project-level risk 
assessment for money laundering, terrorist financing and prohibited practices and has 
determined a low probability and high impact. In addition to its standard set of internal 
controls, the AE will ensure that beneficiaries receiving equipment are subject to adequate 
training as well as an agreement that prohibits them from engaging in selling the equipment to 
third parties.  
Summary risk assessment and recommendation  
Summary risk assessment Risk assessment 
Overall project/programme  Medium Medium risk classification as a result of the 
experience of the accredited entity in the country, 
the operations and maintenance risk, impact of 
cost increases and demand risk of the project Accredited entity/ executing 
entity capability to implement 
the project/programme  Medium


---
*Page 94*
---

 
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01 
Page 94 
 
 
Project-specific execution  Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration  Low 
Compliance Medium 
4.4 Fiduciary 
66. CAF is the AE for the project and the EEs of the programme are the Government of 
Colombia (through MHCP and MADR) and CIAT. 
67. MHCP will be the entity responsible for the project resources, both credit and grant 
resources from the GCF as well as CAF financing resources. The Government of Colombia will 
take loans from both GCF and CAF, and will provide grants to the beneficiaries ( gremios). 
68. MADR is the main EE along with CIAT. MADR will be responsible for supervising the 
technical implementation of the project, in accordance with its own internal rules, policies and 
procedures, including the administration and management of the use of GCF resources, as well 
as the follow-up, evaluation and reporting responsibilities. It will be responsible for executing 
the resources and technical implementation of the project through the Directorate of 
Innovation, Technological Development and Sanitary Protection. Also, MADR will be responsible 
for supervising CIAT to ensure that all activities are executed on time and with the required 
quality, to ensure that the project aims are achieved. MADR will receive technical support from 
the alliance between Biodiversity International, CIAT and other partner organizations. 
69. The loan resources will be administered according to the CAF Credit Process Manual 
which guides the process for all phases of credit, including (i) origination; (ii) evaluation; (iii) 
approval; (iv) formalization; and (v) administration. The non-reimbursable resources of the 
GCF, on the other hand, will be executed by the Government of Colombia, through MADR and 
CIAT. 
70. MADR will be responsible for the project financial execution and implementation before 
MHCP and CAF. CAF and the Government of Colombia, through MHCP and MADR, will enter a 
subsidiary agreement for the use of GCF funds. MADR will carry out direct contracting with 
CIAT under the Colombian legal framework called the Technical and Scientific Cooperation 
Agreement. The Government of Colombia, acting through MADR, will retain the final approval 
authority over any matter/decision adopted by the project cooperation team/any other 
governance bodies or units. MADR will have support in the operation of the project from the 
Alliance of Biodiversity International and CIAT, and the producer associations, following the 
regulations and frameworks defined and allowed by Colombian legislation. These arrangements 
will be reflected in the agreement signed between MADR and CIAT. 
71. CIAT will form a project coordination team (PCT) that will be directly responsible for 
interacting with the project executing unit within MADR and responding to its technical and 
administrative requirements. The PCT will be responsible for implementing the project and will 
guide the six theme leaders and eight crop coordinators. The team will work with the relevant 
areas of MADR, CIAT, the strategic partners, and any other institution, firm, or person 
contracted to provide a service or supply a good. The PCT will be responsible for the project’s 
institutional relationships, led by the project leader, and therefore must respond to MADR, 
which will ensure the proper execution of the project and the adequate use of resources. The 
team will be responsible for preparing the technical reports and submitting them to MADR and 
preparing the financial report. The interaction between MADR and CIAT will be carried out 
through the project executing unit (MADR) and the PCT (CIAT).


---
*Page 95*
---

 
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01 
Page 95 
 
 
72. The financial control and procurement processes will be implemented in accordance 
with the rules and regulations of the CAF, which were certified in the accreditation process 
before the GCF. During project execution, CAF will supervise and guarantee quality in 
accordance with its policies and procedures. This will include follow-up missions, spot checks, 
and participation in steering committee meetings. The project will be subject to the CAF audit 
regime, which includes external and internal auditing. 
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting 
73. As a cross-cutting initiative, the programme aims at generating both mitigation and 
adaptation benefits. On the mitigation side, the intervention is expected to result in overall GHG 
emission reductions of 9,152,034 tCO 2eq over the project lifespan of 25 years, as per the metrics 
of the GCF core indicator for mitigation (based on the GHG accounting methodology detailed 
under annex 22 of the funding proposal). On the adaptation side, 619,691 direct beneficiaries 
and 347,9996 indirect beneficiaries are expected as adaptation impact. The AE provided a 
robust methodology and rationale for defining both direct and indirect beneficiaries in annex 24 
of the funding proposal. 
74. The theory of change diagram adequately captures different levels of expected changes 
as well as logical linkages between them from the goal statement to the proposed activities. The 
barriers and risks that may hinder the achievement of these changes are identified and linked to 
pertinent activities which will tackle them.  
75. The logical framework has been designed in accordance with relevant GCF-level impacts 
and outcomes as well as with project-specific outputs. In most cases baselines and targets of 
each indicator are provided on the basis of data available from credible sources, such as 
national surveys.  
76. It is welcome to have a baseline study in the first year of project implementation as 
indicated in annex 5 (Implementation timeline) of the funding proposal, through which the AE 
will establish concrete definitions and methodologies for its performance indicators. The 
timeline also indicates the submission timings of annual performance reviews and deliverables 
of each subactivity. 
77. Annex 11 (Monitoring and evaluation plan) of the funding proposal clearly describes the 
key concepts and elements of the monitoring and evaluation system and how it will be reported 
back to the GCF.  
4.6 Legal assessment  
78. The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredited Entity on 15 
November 2016 (the “ AMA”), and it became effective on 19 March 2018. 
79. The Accredited Entity has not provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has 
obtained all internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project. It 
is recommended that, prior to submission of the Funding Proposal to the Board (a) the 
Accredited Entity has obtained all its internal approvals and (b) the Fund has received a 
certificate or legal opinion from the Accredited Entity in form and substance satisfactory to the 
Fund confirming that all final internal approvals by the Accredited Entity have been obtained 
and that it has the authority and capacity to implement the project.  
80. The proposed project will be implemented in Colombia, a country in which GCF is not 
provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, amongst other things, GCF is not 
protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need to be further


---
*Page 96*
---

 
GCF/B.31/02/Add.01 
Page 96 
 
 
assessed. The GCF provided an updated draft agreement on privileges and immunities, along 
with a background note, to the host country on 8 April 2019. 
81. The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism (IRM) and Independent Integrity 
Unit (IIU) have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress 
activities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with 
relevant privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the 
GCF are made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and 
expropriation in the country(ies), or has been provided with appropriate privileges and 
immunities. 
4.7 List of proposed conditions (including legal) 
82. In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is 
made subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Submission by the Accredited Entity to the Fund of a certificate or legal opinion, in form 
and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, within 120 days after Board approval, 
confirming that the Accredited Entity has obtained all final internal approvals needed by 
it and has the capacity and authority to implement the proposed project; 
(b) Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval, or the date the 
Accredited Entity has provided a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has 
obtained all final internal approvals, whichever is later; and 
(c) Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.


---
*Page 97*
---

 
GCF/B. 31/02/Add. 01 
Page 97 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP182 
Proposal name:  Climate -smart initiatives for climate change adaptation and 
sustainability in prioritized agricultural production systems 
in Colombia (CSICAP)  
Accredited entity:  Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF)  
Country/(ies):  Colombia  
Programme/programme size:  Medium  
I. Assessm ent of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1.1 Impact potential                 Scale: Medium  to high  
1. Concept . This is a semi -experimental funding proposal for upscaling and upgrading the  
‘digital agriculture ’1 pilot initiative of the G overnment of Colombia. The proposal targets nine  
agriculture value chains  (rice, maize, potato, sugarcane, panela cane, coffee, bananas, plantain s 
and livestock ) in six agroclimatic zones  of Colombia .2 The CSICAP initiative ha s a nation- wide  
approach  and will be implemented in 22 departments and 219 municipalities  of Colombia , 
directly benefiting 619,691people, of whom  more than 194,871 are farmers from different 
producers’ associations and about 424,820 people their family members . The funding proposal 
is expected to reduc e or avoid 9.15 million tCO 2eq during the 25 -year lifespan  of the project 
(366,081 tCO 2eq annually) .  
2. The pilot phase of the digital agriculture  initiative  was initiat ed in 2012  by the Alliance 
of Biodi versity International ( the Alliance ) and the International Center for Tropical Agriculture 
(CIAT )3  in cooperation  with the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development /Ministerio de 
Agricultura y Desarrollo Rural  (MADR) of Colombia  and was implemented in 2013 –2015 . It 
covered mainly  two value chai ns (rice  and maize) in eight department s of Colombia . The 
capacities of t wo crop producer associations, known as gremios ,4 Fedearroz  (rice)  and Fenalce  
(maize) , were  strengthen ed during the pilot . The results of the pilot phase were assessed on 
success, barriers and gaps  and supported  development of this funding proposal.  
3. The pilot  phase had four basic activitie s to mitigate climate change effects on Colombian 
farmers  and these remain as key activities in the funding proposal :  
(a) Agroclimatic risk management  focuse s on development and validation of climate 
variability and long -term predictions for agricultural sectors  in different Colombian 
 
1 Digital agriculture  refers to agricultural practices that digitally collect, store, analyze, and share electronic data and 
information along the agricultural value chain.  
2 Considering the most general classifications, the project covers 6 of the 7 agroc limatic zones of the country and 22 
(40 per cent) of the 54 subregions considering more detailed agroclimatic classification.  
3 See overview: https://www.cgiar.org/?s=International+Center+for+Tropical+Agriculture  
4 A ‘gremio’ refers to a crop -specific pri vate sector organization consisting of small, medium and large -scale farmers, 
which aims to support the category to improve competitiveness and income profitability. These organizations are 
nation- wide in Colombia and have branches in all relevant areas fo r each specific agricultural system. Usually, the 
gremios provide a variety of services including, but not limited to, research and innovation, technical and 
commercial assistance and input provision. Most gremios were established decades ago. They also re present 
farmers before governmental institutions so that their needs are addressed. Some of those organizations have separate research and innovation entities to support farmers.


---
*Page 98*
---

 
GCF/B. 31/02/Add. 01 
Page 98 
 
 
regions to improve crop management . During the pilot phase progress  was made in the 
development of climate forecast models and their validation for some of the prioritized 
zones  and the first site-specific agriculture analyses  were  also carried out  on the 
behaviour of selected crops under climate variability ;  
(b) Site-specific agriculture  management  includes identif ication  problems that limit 
agricultural sector growth, collect information at the farm level, and propose 
technological solutions adapted to the producer's needs  under climate variability . 
Genetically improved species with tolerance to drought and waterlogging w ere 
evaluated and the water footprint was measured for different production systems, 
including  rice, during the pilot ;  
(c) Testing new agricultural technologies for adaptation to climate change hazards  and 
mitigation of greenhouse gas es (GHGs ) aiming to  define agricultural innovations and best 
agricultural management practices that contribute to reducing GHG s emissions and offer 
alternatives for adapting to climate change . During the pilot stage the carbon footprint  
of palm trees, intensive silvopastoral systems and fruit trees was measured . Soil loss and 
the water footprint of potatoes were also measured , and cassava materials were 
evaluated . 
(d) Evaluating sustainable production systems  targeting the identif ication of  sustainable 
production systems adapted to the national context and train ing interested partners in 
using new tools and technologies to mitigate climate change effects.  In the pilot phase  
capacity -building was provided  for the technical staff  of gremios , and i n some specific 
areas information was delivered directly to producers.  Targeted  Gremios , Fedearroz  
and Fenalce , respectively for rice and  maize , have found great potential in the 
information and tools generated during the two years of work . 
4. The independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) considers that t he main result of this 
pilot is  the joint work carried out between the national G overnment, acad emia, research 
cent res, non- governmental organizations ( NGOs ), producer associations and farmers.   
5. The funding proposal consists of three interconnected components  each with  two result 
areas also covering the territories  targeted during the pilot phase :  
(a) Component 1  covers  deployment of d igital agriculture and climate services for rural 
modernization with an emphasis on adaptation and mitigation . Component 1 activities 
will be carried out in 179 municipalities in 6 agricultural subregions (Dry Caribbean, 
Humid Caribbean, Inter -Andean Valleys, Foothills/Mid -mountain, High Mountain, 
Eastern Plains) .  
Result  1.1 is strengthened and m odernized digital agricultural and extension systems 
with an emphasis on adaptation and mitigation.  Seven ‘Big Data’5 platform s will be 
establish ed (design, assembly, implementation and operation ) to supply analyzed and 
processed information that considers user’s social, ethnic and gender differences ; 
producer associations are  empowered to deliver recommendations on adaptation and 
mitigation measures to producers;  management of agroclimatic risks allow s provi sion of  
timely and reliable information to more than one million users (considered indirect 
beneficiaries) on the main climatic threats and cro p management recommendations to 
avoid losses .  
Result 1.2  is established and/or strengthened a groclimatic services  to provide 
recommendations on adaptation and mitigation measures. Direct technical support is 
provided to approximately 123,389 producers and  indirect support to 104,000 users 
 
5Big Data Technologies can be defined as  software tools for analyzing, proces sing, and extracting data from an 
extremely complex and large data set with which traditional management tools can never deal.


---
*Page 99*
---

 
GCF/B. 31/02/Add. 01 
Page 99 
 
 
and 15 Agroclimatic Technical Working Groups wh ich will receive  recommendations 
through the climatic services platforms  on how  to reduce crop losses . 
(b) Component 2  considers improvement  of genetic resources ( tolerance to climate 
variability ), crop management techniques and other technological options and their 
scaling -up to increase climate resilience and promote low -carbon agricultural 
development. Activities of component 2 will take place at CIAT's campus in  Cali, 
Colombia , and at experimental stations located in the same six agricultural subregions 
as component 1.  
Result 2.1  is a strengthened germplasm bank, new climate resilient varieties developed, 
and their seeds massively distributed. A key deliverable is design and development of a 
state -of-the-art Phenotyping Platform to identify low -carbon production and climate -
resistant genetic resourc es (heat, drought and excess water -tolerant varieties) .  
Result 2.2  is improved knowledge on the water and carbon footprints  of selected value 
chains. In this regard development of new crop management techniques and 
technologie s and scaling up existing technologies to increase climate variability 
resilience and GHG mitigation will be supported in the targeted value chains for 
different types of farmers . As a r esult of this  activity  at least 30 new low -emission and 
resilient technologies should be de velop ed, validate d and implement ed and 70 existing 
technologies (genetic improvement, crop management techniques and other 
technological options)6 should be scale d up. In 131,710 hectares  resilience  to climate 
variability  is increase d and in 8,750 hectares low-carbon agricultural practices are 
promote d, reducing 432,297 ton nes of CO 2e. These activities will  mainly  take place at 
CIAT's campus in Cali, Colombia , and at experimental stations located in the six 
agricultural subregions (Dry Caribbean, Humid Caribbean, Inter -Andean Valleys, 
Foothills/Mid -mountain, High Mountain, Eastern Plains) since they must be performed 
under controlled conditions.  
(c) Component 3  should ensure identification and implementation of innovative and 
inclusive business models through modernized innovation systems and a more engaged 
financial sector . As this component will be supporting the implementation of the first 
two components, component 3 will be implemented in all the previously prioritized locations . 
Result  3.1 of this component  is improved  business models that provide farmers with 
reasonable profits and improved GHG mitigation practices. In particular, improved 
business models on climate resilie nce and low -carbon technologies will be operational 
and effective for  at least 60 entities of the agricultural sector (including Departmental 
and Municipal Agriculture Secretariats) covering 4,400 technicians .  
Result 3.2  should be m odernized technical assistance and agricultural extension services 
with multi -tool strategies, adapted to specific environmental, social, gender and 
productive contexts at the national level.  Reinforce d training will be provided to 54,000 
agricultural producers for low -carbon and resilient agriculture considering 
environmental, social and gender aspects.  
 
6 In the case of rice and maize, the aim is to scale up technologies that were previously evaluated in the pilot and were 
found to perform well. For example, the MIRI (multiple -inlet rice irrigation system) for low water consumption in 
rice; Cenicaña (privat e, non -profit corporation, founded in 1977 at the initiative of the Association of Sugar Cane 
Growers of Colombia) developments in the efficient use of water, Augura developments in bio -pesticides and 
efficient use of fertilizers; Fedepanela with more effi cient burner systems and fertilizer use; Fedegan, CIPAV, 
Agrosavia and the CIAT Biodiversity Alliance with sustainable livestock systems model; Cenicafé with systems for the efficient use of fertilizers and harvesting, treatment and use of water in agrofor estry models; in potatoes with 
minimum tillage and conservation agriculture developed by the CIAT Bio diversity Alliance.


---
*Page 100*
---

 
GCF/B. 31/02/Add. 01 
Page 100 
 
 
6. An important step that is expected to be taken with this project is to improve the 
information available at site- specific level, and to accompany that information with 
recommendations that are supported by predictions with high performance that make it 
possible to generate a good degree of confidence in producers. The proper selection of a variety 
in relation to the local environmental resources  can make a difference of up to 40  per cent  in 
yield. However, this must be complemented with the development and implementation of 
technologies to face different circumstances that may arise due to the predicted climatic 
conditions. In this sense, it is necessary to develop technological options to maintain high yields 
under different types of stress factors, for exa mple, abiotic factors, such as low solar radiation, 
high nighttime  temperatures, high CO 2 concentrations and reduced rainfall (drought), as well as 
biotic factors  that can be exacerbated when certain climatic circumstances occur, as is the case 
with phytos anitary problems  
7. In the opinion of the independent TAP,  the funding proposal is quite innovative and has 
potential to achieve high i mpact  in agriculture and food security. However, there are still 
barriers which should be taken into consideration , such as vertical dissemination of scientific 
results  achieved and shared with gremios . As was identified within the pilot phase , while 
interaction between the Alliance and the associations was good, the producers' vertical 
dissemination was not always satisfactory . It is key to incorporate spaces and strategies that 
allow farmers to be massively involved  and to ensure an equal level of access to the digital 
communications  for all farmers . As these gaps could significant ly affect  the final impact of the 
initiative, the independent TAP scored this criteria medium to high.  
1.2 Paradigm shift potential              Scale: High  
8. The independent TAP considers that the success of this approach , as described  in the 
funding proposal , could significantly contri bute to the future of sustainable and safe food 
security .7 According to the Food and Agriculture Organization  of the United Nations  (FAO ), to 
produce a “ sustainable food  future” , the world must increase food production while cutting  GHG 
emissions  and maintaining (or reducing) the land used in  agriculture  and ‘digital agriculture ’ 
could address these challenges by making the agricultural value chain more efficient, equitable 
and environmentally sustainable . To achieve this agricultural research, extension and advisory 
services are essential .8 FAO  describe s the digitalization process of agriculture as a revolution, 
namely, a digital agricultural revolution .  
9. As introduced in the impact assessment section , this proposal  offers  upscaling and 
upgrading of the “digital agriculture programme”  pilot phase initiate d in Colombia in 2012 . The 
funding proposal  plan s to scale up (for new crops and agroclimatic regions)  successful findings 
(for rice  and maize) and upgrad e activities for assessment of risks not considered or not fully 
successful during the pilot stage  with strengthening the understanding of how climate affects 
the various farming systems and value chains through crop -climate modelling  and empirical 
data analysis .  
10. As was report ed in the accredited entity’s ( AE) responses  on the independent TAP 
questions,  one of the key successes of the pilot phase was establish ing digital and participatory 
climate services platforms led by the Local Technical Agroclimatic Committees. These 
Committee s have transformed Colombian agriculture in five ways: (1) increas ing confidence in 
the quality of climate and agroclimatic information; (2) enhanc ing the level of understanding of 
agroclimatic information; (3) spreading  climate knowledge across the territor y; (4) 
transform ing the way crops are produced in certain regions; and (5) lea ding to institutional and 
policy changes. A Pledge by the MADR to create 15 Local Technical Agroclimatic Committees by 
 
7 According to FAO and World Resource Institute (WRI) preliminary estimations, “The world will need to produce 
50% more food (as compared to 2010, under ‘business as usual’ growth) to feed over 9 billion in 2050.”  
8 Research and Extension  | FAO | Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations .


---
*Page 101*
---

 
GCF/B. 31/02/Add. 01 
Page 101 
 
 
2030  has already been met with the support of  FAO  and Conso rtium of International 
Agricultural Research Centers  (CGIAR ). 
11. The independent TAP considers that such joint activities f rom  government and scientific 
institutions for gathering  locally test ed scientific and experimental information  for further  
identification of gaps and planning improvements in consultations with farmers and farmers ’ 
associations should have real transformational impact in the agriculture sector . The 
independent TAP agrees with the project proponents that “ as long as adaptation  continues to be 
considered as a problem of generalizing around some intuitive measures, we will be far from 
real, competitive and site -specific solutions. ” 
12. The Approach offered in the funding proposal is progressive  and covers most of the gaps 
existing in  the agriculture sector on how to reduc e the sector vulnerability including climate 
change  vulnerability and produce low -emission safe food product s in a sustainable way. The 
proposal has to ensure maximum digitalization of entire value chains for nine  agricultural 
activities;  monitor the vulnerability of crops to climate variability and to climate hazard ; model 
future climate change at local level;  manage  information with Big Data Systems and  
Phenotyping Platforms ; improve resilience of crops to climate change through modification of  
germplasm ; ensure horizontal and vertical dissemination of information (early warning  process , 
innovative technics , technologies and tools ); ensure security of biodiver sity, food  and health 
related to the genetic modi fication of crops;  develop and implement  novel and inclusive 
business models;  ensure financial institutions access to information to develop tailored financial 
products that support scaling of climate -smart technologies;  and gremios  to have  close to 100  
per cent  capacity  in each of the technologies proposed in the framework of the project.  
13.  The independent TAP recognizes the complexity of the activities planned but at the 
same time understands that only a combination of all the activities listed above could bring real 
impact and effect, real transformational change. The independent TAP confirm s that the role of 
this funding proposal is crucial to accelerat e a paradigm shift process in  the country’s  
agriculture  sector  initiated by the pilot phase . In case of success,  the approach could also be a 
model for other agricultural countries.  
1.3 Sustainable development potential             Scale:  Medium to high  
14. A comprehensive Environmental Safeguards Monitoring Framework  (ESMF ) is provided 
for this funding proposal where all potential risk areas and mitigation measures for each 
component are  detailed. During the review C omponent 2 was particularly targeted for 
assessment of risks and mitigation measures.  The incorporation and enforcement of the  risk 
mitigation measures will minimize potential adverse impacts of the project on the environment,  
communities and project beneficiaries. The project ’s information disclosure strategy and 
grievance redress mechanism seek to promote transparency and accountability among 
stakeholders.  
15. Component 2 of the funding proposal consists  of activities related to  the increase of crop 
resilience to climate variability and long -term changes in agroclimatic zones. Among such 
activities are genetic modification for development of improved seeds, hybrids and clones 
resistant to effects associated with climate variabili ty and pest resistance, and the dissemination  
of these modified seeds in regions with similar conditions. Such activities could have some  risks 
for biodiversity and health , as well as for sustainable development process es in general,  and 
require relevant control by the Government and through international treaties.  Within this 
context special attention was given by the independent TAP to the project ’s ESMF , which is 
annex 6  of the funding proposal package.  
16. The ESMF document demonstrates t hat w here research on genetic improvements of 
crops and the introduction of genetically improved organisms are carried out, there will be


---
*Page 102*
---

 
GCF/B. 31/02/Add. 01 
Page 102 
 
 
compliance with the provisions and restrictions established  by the country in current 
regulations . 
17. The ESMF consider s all relevant  regulations in force in this area  including chapter 2  
(Basic Genetic Materials of Improved Seeds ) and chapter 3 ( Living Modified Organisms ) of the 
Sole Regulatory Decree of the Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Rural Development 
Administrative Sector , Decree 1071 of 2015 , in particular:  
(a) Article 2.13.7.2.2.1 which d etermines that the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development, through the Colombian Agricultural Institute (ICA ), has the function of 
supervising the registration, c ertification, multiplication and distribution of all improved 
material intended for food or industrial crops ; 
(b)  Article 2.13.7.2.2.3. d efines that basic genetic materials  produced by private industry 
that are to be delivered for multiplication and distribut ion to the public, in the form of 
improved materials, must be registered with the ICA ; 
(c) Article 2.13.7.2.2.4 determines that the ICA must certify seed s derived from  improved 
materials to be made available to the public ; and 
(d) The r egulatory framework for Livi ng Modified Organisms (LMOs) following the 
provisions of Law 740 of 2002, which approves the "Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to 
the Convention on Biological Diversity", which applies to the transboundary movement, 
transit, handling, and use of LMOs that m ay have adverse effects on the environment 
and biological diversity, taking into account the risks to human health, productivity and agricultural production . 
18. The ESMF considers r isk mitigation measure s for Activity 2.1 , “Strengthening the 
germplasm bank, development of new varieties and massive multiplication of seeds for 
adaptation and mitigation. Seed multiplication techniques will be applied to outstanding 
varieties, facilitating a large -scale adoption of the varieties developed by the p roject ”. In the 
ESMF t he AE identified that the i mpact of activity  2.1 could be introduction of genetically 
modified organisms which  might have negative impacts on ecosystems and biodiversity (for 
example: crossing and/or genetic contamination of native sp ecies, competition with native 
species, loss of native species, development of more resistant pests, among others) and 
estimated this as high risk with a probability of 4 ( within  a score system of 5) and impact rate of 
4. Three activities are planned for m itigation of this risk:  
(a) Regarding the introduction and management of genetically modified organisms, the 
project will comply with the corresponding regulations in relation to authorizations and 
permits, among others. In addition, great attention will be paid to interventions carried 
out in surrounding areas of moorland ecosystems, taking into account the guidelines of 
Law 1930 of 2018. This issue is of special attention for the potato value chain ; 
(b) Carry out research and experimentation in controlled environ ments, in such a way as to 
avoid a possible negative impact on the species and ecosystems of the intervention 
areas ; and 
(c) Carry out impact evaluations associated with the biosafety aspects of genetically 
modified organisms that are developed in the project in compliance with current 
regulations, and that involve the analysis of potential impacts on ecosystems . 
As a result of th ese risk mitigation measures the risk downscaled to  medium and the probability 
and impact are downrated to 2 and 3 respectively . 
19. For activities 2.1 and 2.2 risk is  assessed as high (5 score)  for cases when genetically 
modified organisms could be used  or high impact production practices develop ed in areas with 
moorland ecosystems. This risk should be given special attention in the potato and livestock 
value chains , among others . Mitigation measures have been planned and as a result the risk is


---
*Page 103*
---

 
GCF/B. 31/02/Add. 01 
Page 103 
 
 
downscaled to moderate, and the probability and impact are downrated to 2 and 3 respectively. 
Mitigation measures planned are: 
(a) The project wi ll comply with restrictions stated in the regulations, specifically in Law 
1930 of 2018 article 5, which establishes prohibitions of some productive practices in 
moorlands such as: the use of heavy machinery in the development of agricultural 
activities; t he final disposal, management and burning of solid and/or hazardous waste; 
the introduction and management of genetically modified organisms and invasive 
species; burning; logging; fumigation and spraying of chemicals should be gradually 
eliminated in acti vities of conversion of agricultural land into sustainable activities; and 
the degradation of native vegetation cover, among other practices, is prohibited;  
(b) The project will not carry out activities within delimited moorland areas (there are 37 
moorland co mplexes in Colombia). However, in case it is necessary within the scope of 
the project to provide assistance to producers located in those areas, the 
aforementioned prohibitions will be respected , and the project will promote the 
participation of those pro ducers in training spaces that will inform about and promote 
the development of sustainable practices, which in turn will allow reduc tion  of pressure 
on these ecosystems. As mentioned above , these measures need special attention in the 
potato and livestock  value chains ; and 
(c) The Project Management Unit (environmental team), with support from the producer associations , will identify the male and female producers who carry out their productive 
activities in areas close/adjacent to delimited moorland ecosystems and will monitor 
the implementation of project activities developing sustainable agriculture practices. 
They will provide guidance and technical assistance for producers in these areas to 
participate in the activities proposed by the environmental authorities within the scope of Law 1930 of 2018 . 
20. The producer associations, CIAT, Agrosavia  and MADR are r esponsible for monitoring 
activity 2.1 compliance with ESM F. Key groups  for monitoring are:  producers who have their 
crops in areas close to delimited moors; cattle breeders who have their livestock production 
activities in areas close to delimited moors; producers in areas near delimited moors that 
implement sustainable production practices; pr oducers in areas near delimited moors that 
implement solid waste management practices.  
21. In general , the monitoring scheme s for all components are similar ; the producer 
associations are the responsible entities for initial monthly and annual monitoring repor ts on 
risks and non- compliance with ESMF, and for providing details of corrective actions taken to 
reduce the impact of any difficulties, situations and/or problems encountered . Producer 
associations report to the P roject Management U nit, wh ich will report  to the National Project 
Manager, CAF, and the MADR . Detailed performance criteria for monitoring are provided in the 
ESMF for all components.  ICA is an entity with in MADR  and has the responsibility to legislate on 
sanitary, phytosanitary, production and inputs control issues . 
22. The ESMF confirms that regarding the sustainable use of biodiversity and the 
management of genetically improved  organisms, within the framework of th e Convention on 
Biological Diversity, Colombia participated in the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety9 of in 2000, 
and approved through Law 740 of 2002 . In 2010 , the country participated in the Nagoya 
 
9 The “Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity” is an international treaty governing 
the movements of living mo dified organisms  (LMOs) resulting from modern biotechnology from one country to 
another. It was adopted on 29 January 2000 as a supplementary agreement to the Convention on Biological 
Diversity and entered into force on 11 September 2003.


---
*Page 104*
---

 
GCF/B. 31/02/Add. 01 
Page 104 
 
 
Protocol on access to genetic resources and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising 
from their use, which was approved through Law 1926 of 2018 .10 
23. The funding propo sal contributes mainly to Sustainable Development Goal 2, “End 
hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainabl e agriculture ” and 
in particular to  target 2.a, which aims to “increase investment, including through enhanced 
international cooperation, in rural infrastructure, agricultural research and extension services, 
technology development and plant and livestock gene banks in order to enhance agricultural 
productive capacity in developing countries, in particular least developed countries. ” 
24. The funding proposal could significantly contribute to the sustainable food security 
process though there are some risks which should be very closely monitor ed against any 
potential negative leakage. During an interview , the AE confirmed that the funding proposal 
mainly considers “conventional genetic improvements” and that “non- conventional genetically 
modified organ isms” are not the part of the funding proposal. The independent TAP’s 
understanding is that there is no clear delineation between these two from the scientific point of view and as a result the ESMF attached to the project  is quite detailed . 
25.  The independe nt TAP takes into consideration that GCF does  not have a policy on 
genetically modified bioproducts and that Colombia is a member of Cartagena Dialog and has all 
necessary regulation s and responsible bod ies for monitoring and certification of genet ic 
modif ication/improvement  prosses at national level  and the criteria scored as medium to high.  
In addition, the independent TAP suggests a specific recommendation to the Board in case of 
approval of this funding proposal (see para 49). 
1.4 Needs of the recipient               Scale:  High  
26. The f easibility study describes everyday challenges faced by Colombia’s agriculture 
sector, by producers and gremios such as price issues and competitiveness, some with 
international market  problems and others with resp ect to national markets. These challenges 
are exacerbated by climate change and weather -related losses. Columbia’s intended nationally 
determined contribution,  among the priority activities to be implemented by 2030 , considers 
ten agricultural subsectors such as rice, coffee, livestock and silvopastoral  systems , with 
improved capabilities to adapt appropriately to climate change and climate variability . 
27. There is a clear commitment in the agricultural sector to aim at the objectives  proposed 
in the nationally determined contributions ( NDC ) for adaptation and mitigation of climate 
change in the sector, and at the same time a high degree of awareness of the importance of 
joining efforts between the different institutions of the private sector ( gremios) , public sector 
(MADR), research cent res (Alliance of Bio diversity International and CIAT , Agrosavia, and crop 
research cent res) to design a strategy that allows prioritizing and coordinating efficient actions 
aimed at concrete results in the coming years. A major barrier in Colombia has always been to 
bring all these institutions together towards a common goal.  
28. The d igitalization of agriculture should be considered as the future of this sector 
worldwide , including Colombia . The Colombian agricultural secto r has seen a drastic drop in its 
share of the national economy in recent decades, from 22 per  cent of GDP in the late 1970s to 
6.0 per  cent in 2015. In recent years, the sector has shown a slight recovery, with growth of 2.4  
per cent  and 2.3  per cent  for 2 018 and 2019 respectively. Areas  identified  as inhibiting faster 
development of the sector are:  
 
10 The Nagoya Protocol is significant in terms of  conservation of biodiversity, and for having an equitable sharing of 
benefits of the genetic resources. This is also intended to help indigenous peoples everywhere to avoid being 
exploited for their traditional kn owledge and expertise.


---
*Page 105*
---

 
GCF/B. 31/02/Add. 01 
Page 105 
 
 
(a) Limited capacities of agricultural extension services and local farmers to collect, manage 
and systematize data to generate site - and time -specific advice for good  management 
practices under climatic conditions induced by climate variability and change ; 
(b) Limited access to and knowledge of genetic resources and their tolerance to climate 
variability and change by local farmers and producers ; 
(c) Limited knowledge of water footprint and efficient water use technologies to promote 
behavioural changes that contribute to a better use of water resources, particularly 
under stress conditions;  
(d) Limited knowledge of carbon footprint at crop and technology level to promote l arge -
scale adoption of low -emission practices ; 
(e) Weak/vulnerable business models and lack of tailored financial instruments;  
(f) Weak extension services based on a linear model that provides blanket 
recommendations rather than site-  and time -specific guidelines;  
(g) Limited knowledge of contributing factors to climate -smart agricultural technolog y uses 
and adoption by farmers in the targeted value chains ; 
(h) Limited access to productive factors and participation in labo ur and decision -making 
process es by women and young  farmers;  and 
(i) Limited adoption of good practices to reduce environmental risks in at -risk areas (e.g. 
use of fertilizers.  
29. Well -developed digital infrastructure for communication is a key element of the system 
promoted by the proposal. USAID’s digital ecosy stem assessment for Colombia  highlight s the 
need for investment and the potential for innovation in the country’s  rural areas. The funding 
proposal is in fact tapping into this potential  for innovation and democratizing digitally enabled 
services for climate adaptation  through leveraging private sector investment (from the gremios 
and the Government) .  
30. The independent TAP considers that needs of the recipient country are high and th e GCF 
programme could be a significant contribution to narrowing most  of the  identified  gaps through 
the activities, such as the establishment of tools for assessment of value chains of bio -businesses 
on sustainability including climate change resilienc e and low  emission s, and strengthening crop 
resilience to climate change, to support start -up cases .  
1.5 Country ownership               Scale:  High  
31. As was already highlighted above , this funding proposal is upscaling the  national  
programme initiated by the Government of Colombia represented by the MADR  in cooperation 
with t he Alliance of Bio diversity International and CIAT  via an agreement for technical and 
scientific cooperation . The four basic topics of agreement for mitigat ing climate change effects 
on Colombian farmers  are detailed under the investment criteria “impact assessment”.  
32. The funding proposal has two executing entities: MADR and the International Center for 
Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), with MADR responsible for providing technical guidance for project 
implementation and supervising CIAT to ensure that all activities are executed on time and with 
the required quality to ensure the achievement of project results.  
33. The Government of Colombia through the Ministry of F inance and Public Credit will be 
the entity responsible for project resources, both credit and grant resources from GC F, as well 
as CAF financing resources. The MADR  will be responsible for executing the project resources 
and technical implementation throu gh its Direct orate  of Innovation, Technological Development


---
*Page 106*
---

 
GCF/B. 31/02/Add. 01 
Page 106 
 
 
and Health Protection .11 The Government of Colombia will take loans from both GCF and CAF 
and will provide grants to the beneficiaries (gremios) given the public goods nature of the 
interventions.  The MADR will be  support ed in the operation of th is project by the Alliance of 
Biodiversity International and CIAT and the producer associations  providing  strong adherence 
to the legislation and regulations of the Government of Colombia.  In addition, CIAT will develop 
a model agreement to be approved by the MADR that will be signed with each of the gremios, 
including the details of the activities, the co -financing provided by each gremio,  and at the end of 
the project, commitments acquired  for its continuity.  
34. The project will have thirteen strategic local partners for project implementation, of 
which there are ten gremios and three research institutions. For the execution of the CSICAP project, CIAT will work in coordination with the follow ing ten gremios: Fedearroz (rice), 
Fenalce (maize), Fedegan (livestock), Fedepanela (panela cane), Fedepapa (potato), Federación 
Nacional de Cafeteros -  Cenicafe (coffee), Asocaña - Cenicaña (sugarcane), Augura, Asbama, and 
Aohofrucol (musaceae). Additiona lly, there are three research institutions as part of the 
strategic implementing partners: the Colombian Agricultural Research Corporation (Agrosavia), 
the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT) and the Center for Research 
on Sustainable  Agricultural Production Systems (CIPAV) of Colombia. These strategic partners 
will have key  role s in the implementation of project activities and therefore will be assigned a 
budget that will be subject to outputs and deliverables. The importance of these partner  
institutions lies in the fact that they will be responsible for the continuity and sustainability of 
the project actions once the project is completed . 
35. The project has undergone a review by the Collegiate Body  (made up of the Ministry of 
Environme nt and Sustainable Development, the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit, the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Presidential Agency for International Cooperation ) which 
supports Colombia’s n ational designated authority (NDA)12 in decision -making  and the fu nding 
proposal has incorporated the comments provided  by the Collegiate Body . This process has 
verified the alignment of the p roject to the goals of the National Development Plan 2018 –2022, 
the contribution to the strategies and goals of the National Climate Change Policy, the Green 
Growth Policy, and the National ly Determined Contribution (NDC), as well as coverage at the 
municipal level (project scale), and other criteria aligned with the investment criteria of GCF.  
36. According to the recently updated NDC, among Colombia's adaptation priorit ies for 
agriculture  is improvement of capacities and information access to prioritized agricultural 
subsectors to adapt to climate variability and/or to climate change hazards . A priority for  food 
security an d poverty eradication is  to ensure that 50 per  cent of programmed actions for risk 
management, adaptation and climate change mitigation  will be implemented  by 2030. The 
funding proposal directly contributes to the achievement of the goals of the NDC , which  are to 
strengthen ten producers’ associations (gremios)  by 2030, and to establish Agroclimatic 
Technical Work Groups  in 27 departments, reaching one million users . 
37. The proposed project is fully aligned with the relevant country strategies and policies.  It 
is a part of Colombia’s GCF country programme.   
38. The e xit strategy described in the f unding proposal highlights country ownership 
through demonstrating clear role s for different stakeholders. The funding proposal informs that 
at the end of the project, the equipment and infrastructure developed by the it  will continue to 
be in the name of MADR, but once the project is completed, they will be delivered to the gremios 
through a contract of bailment in which the gremios manage the assets and servic es (including 
data platforms) but undertake to give it proper use and assume maintenance costs and 
 
11 Represent ing the Ministry before national and international instances related to research, technological 
development, innovation, agricultural technical assistance and health matters. Direction of Innovation, 
Technological Development and Health Protection (minagricultura.gov.co)  
12 In Colombia, the National Planning Department (DNP) is the national designated authority (NDA).


---
*Page 107*
---

 
GCF/B. 31/02/Add. 01 
Page 107 
 
 
responsibility in compliance with national regulations. The funding proposal informs that t his 
mechanism has been successfully used in several projects between MADR and the gremios, 
including the pilot project. A large part of the success of the pilot project lies  in the  
strengthening of capacities and empowerment of the gremios ( as in the case of Fedearroz and 
Fenalce  in the pilot phase ), which continued and expanded the work carried out with them . 
39. The independent TAP considers that countr y ownership  of the funding proposal and 
entire agriculture digitalization process is very high .  
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness              Scale:   Medium  to high   
40. Total budget of the funding proposal is USD 99.91 million with USD 73.28 million (73.3 
per cent) GCF share  and the remaining 26.7 per  cent is a country contribution . USD 25 million, 
25 per  cent of total and 34.1 per  cent of the GCF share is grant. Of the total amount, 10.3 per  cent 
is loan from CAF and 16 per  cent (USD  16.33 million) is the grant co -financing from AGROSAVIA, 
CIAT and from nine producers’ association.  The f und mobilization ratio is 2.75:1. The 
independent TAP cons iders the ratio is efficient , considering that expected results are in the 
‘public goods ’ category.  
41. Two key risk areas were identified by the independent TAP when reviewing the funding 
proposal : appropriateness of digital communication facilities for succ essful implementation of 
digital agriculture results ; and monitoring of performance  results through well -developed  
performance criteria.  Significance of the results monitoring  process in achievement of success is 
well recognized by the project proponents a nd the AE. One of the key findings when analysing 
the pilot phase  (annex 23)  was that weak horizontal penetration of information, knowledge, etc. 
was that monitoring of the ‘last mile’ was lacking , as was concluded by the funding proposal 
developer s. The AE response  on th e issue of  monitoring and evaluation of the pilot project was 
that it was not planned or considered  at the time . Thus,  timely information on the true impact of 
the project  was not available and consequently the Government  of Colombia , the gremios and  
the research cent res were unable t o react and adjust activities relevantly.  
42. According to the funding proposal , initial monitoring  is the responsibility of gremios but 
gremios should get information/data from producers and it sho uld be very clear in the 
agreement that this is not a voluntary activity but a responsibility for both producers and , at 
later stage , for  gremios. During the review, upon the request of the independent TAP, the AE 
provided an English translation of the template agreement between the Alliance and the 
gremios and a last -mile agreement between gremios and producers which were not in full 
satisfaction of the independent TAP. Later  the AE provided relevantly revised template 
agreements.  
43. Regarding the digital communication capacities in targeted regions, additional 
information was provided during the review that a s of 2020, in terms of digital infrastructure,  
Colombia has 116  per cent  mobile phone penetration and 77  per cent  broadband penetration, 
though adoption and use are skewed toward urban centr es. Some 73  per cent  of people (72  per 
cent  of female s, 74 per cent  of male s) own a mobile phone, and 52  per cent  of households  have 
internet access at home. The dig ital divide is  that only 16  per cent  of rural households hav e 
internet at home compared to 63  per cent  of urban households .  
44. About 80  per cent  of the intervention municipalities have (or are in the process of 
implementing ) "Rural Digital Zones" implemented by the Ministry of Information,  Technologies 
and Communications, which, since 2018, offer s internet access with free connectivity 24 hours a 
day in areas with the highest concentration of the populated cent res of municipalities. 
According to a Digital Ecosystem Assessment conducted by USAID, people in rural areas access 
internet outside their home, including at internet cafes, education cent res, and public hotspots. 
Furthermore, the proportion of the rural population with at least a feature phone is far larger


---
*Page 108*
---

 
GCF/B. 31/02/Add. 01 
Page 108 
 
 
than the proportion with a smartphone. In addition, CSICAP will work with a multi -pronged 
strategy using a variety of channels including voicemail ( e.g. interactive vo ice response ( IVR), 
short messaging system (SMS) ), audio books, video, photos, text messages, chatbots/ Wireless 
Application Protocol ( WAP ), TV, r adio, some of which does not require internet and/or literacy . 
45. Regarding the cent ral system for improving the produc tion of  analytical information 
there are several government initiatives and funds focused on guaranteeing and maximizing 
access and service to i nformation and communications technolog ies. At the same time CIAT 
counts on a data cent re with the capacity to attend to most of the project de mands. In addition,  
CIAT has access to BIOS  (the highest performance computers in Colombia) through  the RENATA  
academic network . 
46. From the AE’s response during the review , the independent TAP understood that 
implementation of offline systems and a synchronous communication tools are  envisaged , as an 
interim measure, . This  will allow the project in the field to  sync hronise  or upload the 
information once there is network availability.  The independent TAP consider s that this kind  of 
off-line communication might not be effective , and additional measures should be considered  
(e.g. individual meetings in villages, etc.) to effectively bring necessary information to the final 
customer s/producers wh o could significantly increase the final efficiency of project.  
47. The strength of the funding proposal is partnership. The funding proposal and feasibility 
study highlight that a  major barrier  in Colombia  has always been bring ing together all these 
institutions working  towards a common goal. The importance of these partners lies in the fact 
that they are the institutions that will be responsib le for the continuity and sustainability of the 
project activities once the project is completed . This  should guarantee the high efficiency and 
effect iveness  of this programme.  
48. The independent TAP recognises all the challenges of the project and scores the  
effectiveness and efficiency potential of the funding proposal as medium to high . 
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
49. The independent TAP recom mends this funding proposal for approval by the  GCF Board  
and recommends that the Secretariat establish a special monitoring regime for the 
implementation of ESMF commitments and establish periodic reporting to the Board on this 
issue.


---
*Page 109*
---

 
       GCF/B.3 1/02/Add .01 
Page 109 
 
 
Response from the ac credited entity  to the i ndependent Technical 
Advisory Panel ’s assessment (FP182)  
Proposal  name : Climate -smart initiatives for climate change adaptation and 
sustainability in prioritized agricultural production systems in 
Colombia (CSICA P) 
Accredited entity : Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF)  
Country/(ies):  Colombia  
Programme/progr amme size:  Medium  
 
Impact potential  
CSICAP considers from its formulation the direc t work and massive involvement of producers as 
a response to the les sons learned from the pilot. Components 1 and 2 of the CSICAP project 
consider massive implementation of t echnologies on producers' farms. CSICAP is including a 
whole component (component 3) aimed exclusively at strengthening the vertical dissemination of technologies. The producers’  associat ions/ grem ios and Agrosavia will allocate personnel and 
resources to promote the vertical disse mination of the technologies promoted by CSICAP. The 
CSICAP project is placing a strong emphasis on vertical dissemination for which a high potential 
for impact is expected.  
Paradigm shift potential  
No comments  
Sustainable development potential  
CSICA P will not use genet ically modified organism s.  The Project  (activities  component  2) will 
use on ly conventional genetic impro veme nts.  It is worth not ing that  the methods for pl ant 
improvement are divided into “conventional” and “genetic modified (GM)”, both aim to produce 
a crop with traits to improve the performance of the crop. However , GM achieves this through 
adding new genes f rom other or the same species (transgenic, ci sgenic), inducing recombination 
with the agrobacterium mechanism.   The conventional genetic improvement is the development 
of cultivars  based on the mode of reproduction of the species  (cross pollination, self -pollination 
or clonally propagation)1. 
 
1 Additional  reference  about it : (i) https://royalsociety.org /topics -policy/projects/gm -plants/how -does -gm-differ -from -
conventiona l-plant -breeding/ ; (ii) Acquaah, G. (2015). Conventional Plant Breeding Principles and Techniques. In J. M. 
Al-Khayri , S. M. Jain, & D. V Johnson (Eds.), (iii) Advances in Plant Breeding Strategies: Breeding, Biotechnology and 
Molecular Tools  (pp. 115 –158). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3-319-22521 -0_5


---
*Page 110*
---

 
       GCF/B.3 1/02/Add .01 
Page 110 
 
 
Needs of the recipient  
No comments  
Country ownership  
No comments  
Efficiency and effectiveness  
CSICAP seeks to modernize, empower, and enhance the capacities of the existing extension 
services, and in all cases (i .e. fo r all producers ’ organizations) the offline systems and 
asynchronous communication tools will be a complement to direct work with the farmers 
through focus groups, farm visits , and in field individual meetings  in local a reas .  The use of 
online and o ffline  systems and asynchronous communication tools is a strategy to scale up the 
arrival to additional  producers  of information o n adaptation and mitigation measures and 
achieve greater efficiency in extension systems and achie ve greater impact .  
Overall  remarks from the independent T echnical A dvisory P anel : 
 
As mentione d before  in the section of “Sustainable development potential ”, the CSICAP p roject  
(activities under  component 2)  will not work with gen etically modified organisms  and will only 
use conven tional methods of genetic improvement .  In this sense, the ITAP recommendation 
about “that  the secretariat establish special monitoring regime for the implementation of 
ESMF commitments and est ablish periodic reporting to t he Board ” is based on  the premis e of 
the use of gene tically modified organisms , which is not correct .  We respectfully  suggest that the 
recommendation should be reconsidered.


---
*Page 111*
---

1 
Social, Gender  and Environmental study of the Project CSICAP * in Colombia  
Gender Assessment  
presented to:  
The Alliance of Bioversity International and CIAT  Date : 03/31/2021  
Deliverable  No. 4  
GENDER ASSESSMENT  
CSICAP  All the references in this document have been changed to CSICAP.  If there 
is any reference to CSICAP  should be understa nd as CSICAP *
Annex 8 – Part A  
Green Climate Fund Funding Proposal  
*The initial tittle of the project was changed from Low -Emission and Climate Resilient
Agriculture in Colombia ( LECRA ) to Climate -smart initiatives for climate change adaptation 
and susta inability in prioritized agricultural production systems in Colombia (CSICAP).  All 
the references in this document have been changed to CSICAP.  If there is any reference to 
CSICAP  should be understand as CSICAP  Gender documentation for FP182


---
*Page 112*
---

2 
 Contents  
INTRODUCTION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  3 
1. POPULATION CHARACTERIZATION WITH A GENDER PERSPECTIVE  ................................ ..... 5 
2. CHARACTERIZATION OF PRODUCTION CHAINS FROM A GENDER PERSPECTIVE  ................  18 
3. CAPACITIES OF THE PRODUCER ASSOCIATIONS TO MANAGE GENDER ISSUES  ..................  20 
4. REGULATORY AND GENDER POLICY FRAMEWORK OF CSICAP  PROJECT  ............................  22 
4.1 INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS  ................................ ................................ ............................  22 
4.2 NATIONAL REGULATIONS AND PUBLIC POLICY  ................................ ................................ ..........  23 
4.3 LEGAL FRAMEWORK APPLIC ABLE TO THE CSICAP  PROJECT  ................................ ..........................  27 
4.4 INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITIES AT THE NATIONAL AND LOCAL LEVELS ................................ ..................  29 
5. BIBLIOGRAPHICAL REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ......................  33


---
*Page 113*
---

3 
 Introduction  
 
The following  gender assessment is an input for the formulation of the project “Low Emission 
and Climate Resilient Agriculture ” (CSICAP , for its acronym  in English). This Project seeks to 
improve the capacity of eight agricultural producti on chains  (rice, corn, potato, cattle, banana, 
panela and sugarcane, and coffee) to mitigate  their respective greenhouse gas  emission s and 
adapt to climate  change by increasing efficiency in the use of the natural resources and 
production.  
In recent years, the agricultural activities associated with  these eight products have been  
affected by variability in temperature and rainfall , with more frequent and intense  floods, 
droughts , and frost s, which have sometimes led to crop losses.  Besides , some agricultural and 
livestock practices have contributed to soil de gradation . As a result, productive cycles have been 
altered and land-use conflicts have increased, compromising the resilience  and sustainability of 
production. This in turn increases  the economic  vulnerability of male and female producers  and 
puts food availability at risk .  
These events may have differential repercussions  depending on the characteristics  of the 
territory and its  communities (men and women, or ethnic groups), as well as  the type of 
producers (small, medium , or large), due to the unequal access to productive factors, 
information  technolog ies and the mechanism s for adapting to climate change.  In the case of 
rural women, the effects of climate change are exacerbated by the gender  norms  relations in 
the household  and on the farm . The low participation  in production  decision -making,  low access  
to and control over land and financial and technological resources , overburdened  domestic and 
unpaid care  work , and low income and high levels  of poverty  (especially among female heads of 
household) , among other facts, limit the women’s capacity to develop  adaptation strategies in 
the face of  climate variability.  Besides, the effects on household food security may deepen  
because, on the one hand, the responsibility for food supply  falls on them, and, on the other 
hand, climate change may  decrease the availability of  water, food , and resources for self-
consumption.  
Specifically, in  rural areas  of the country, where  5,8 million  men and 5,2 million women  live, 
there are differences in the socio -demographic conditions of the population . According to DANE 
figures (2020), even though  the number of people of  working age  is similar regardless of gender 
(in the working age s, between 10 and 59 years, the percentage  is similar, 67 .9%, and in the older  
ages slightly higher participation of men than women is identified: 13.1% and 12 .7% 
respectively), participation in the labor  market evidence significant gender gaps: the 73 .8% of 
rural men are employed , compared to 36.8% of  women.  In addition, the  rural female  
unemployment rate  is higher than that of men  (9.6% and 3 .0% respectively), which shows the 
greate r restrictions  faced by women in developing  activities included in the System of National 
Accounts. This situation results  in a lower  capacity of rural women to generate income and, 
therefore, in a higher percentage of monetary poverty (35, 0% of rural female -headed 
households are in this condition, compared to  27.9% of male -headed  households).  
These gender gaps evidence structural causes that limit the equitable development of rural  
women and men and their communities. On the one hand, according to the National Time Use


---
*Page 114*
---

4 
 Survey -ENUT (2016 -2017), women perform  most of the unpaid work in rural areas: they spend 
approximately 8 hours a day  on these  tasks , compared to 3 hours spent by men . On the other 
hand,  according to the  2014  National Agricultural Census, only  in 38 .6% of the Agricultural 
Production Units  in the country, do women participate in decision -making  on production . 
Furthermore , as will be shown in the following chapters, women producer s have l ess access to 
productive assets such as  land, technical  assistance,  and credit.  
Within this framework , the main objective of the Gender Assessment is to provide a baseline for 
recognizing  the initial social, economic,  and environmental conditions of the CSICAP  Project, 
with emphasis  on identifying  social and gender gap s in male and female producers in the 
prioritized  chains.  The purpose of this is  to generate inputs so that  social inclusion and gender 
approache s are considered in the  formulation of the Project,  so that  CSICAP  not only avoids 
deepening of the gaps  identified  but also contributes to the transformation of  the causes that 
generate these inequities.  
 
This Gender Assessment was obtained from mixed  research  methods and triangulation  of 
secondary information  (on norms  and policies) and statistical information,  
mainly instruments (census and surveys) of the National Administrative Department  of 
Statistics , with primary information. Th e latter included the completion by the associations  
of an institutional capacit y analysis form, as well as the development of interviews  and 
group sessions with association officials, extension ists, affiliated female and male producers , 
and institutional actors.  
 
As a result, the Gender Assessment makes  a comprehensive diagnosis with a gender perspective  
of the territories, population , and productive chains targeted by the  CSICAP  Project,  as well as 
the institutional, regulatory , and poli cy framework. To this end , the document is organized in to 
four chapters.  
The first chapter presents a general diagnosis of the social and gender conditions of the 
territories  prioritized  by the CSICAP  Project, which includes demographic , age , and household 
headship characteristics and identifies gender gaps concerning to indicators of poverty , 
education, labo r market, income , and use of time in paid and domestic work and  unpaid care 
activitie s. 
The second chapter characteriz es the prioritized producti on chains,  identifies gender gaps , and 
comprehensively analyzes  different aspects that determine  the success of including a gender 
approach in a climate -resilient agriculture program (Beuchelt & Badstue, 2013) : the social 
conditions of male and female producers,  and their access to and control over productive assets.  
Meanwhile, the third chapter analy zes the institutional capacities of the respective associations 
to manage gender issues.  
The fourth and last chapter defines the institutional and gender policy framework, which  refer s 
to the main international norms adopted by Colombia,  as well as those  established  at the 
national level for the promotion of equity for women, especially those living  in rural areas . 
Similarly,  it mentions the main policies and programs in force that have been formulated  and


---
*Page 115*
---

5 
 implemented by the  national gover nment  to promote  equity for rural women and  analyzes the 
institutional capacities of the entities  involved in this process.  
1. Population characterization with a gender perspective  
 
According to DANE figures (2020a), the territories where the CSICAP1 Project will be 
implemented have a  rural population of 2 ,99 million people, of which 51 .8% (1 ,55 million)  are 
men and 48 .2% (1,44 million) are women. Regarding the distribution of this po pulation  by age 
groups,  Graph 0.1  shows a progressive behavior in the population pyramid  of the rural 
inhabitants of the Project  municipalities , as well as that of the country2 country  as a whole . This 
is related to great er participation of children under 10 years  of age and a relatively 
homogeneous reduction for each of the age groups.  Additionally, when  comparing the 
composition  of the CSICAP  municipalities  regarding the national data , there is  lower 
participation of those under  20 years of age  (34.4%, which is 2,7 percentage points  lower than  
the national situation) and higher  participation those over 40 years  of age . However, given that 
the decrease is rel atively homogeneous —among  each of the groups — in th ese municipalities it 
is not possible to identify a population loss, specifically, in initial working ages  (between 20 and 
29 years  old) as it is presented in the national context, which goes  from  participation of 18 .1% 
to 15 .5% (for the population between 10 and 19 years, and between 20 and 29 years old, 
respectively)  
Graph 0.1. Population  pyramid. Rural area . CSICAP  municipalities  and rural national. 2020  
 
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2020 a)  
Regarding the participation of men and women in decision -making within households,  of the 
941,5 thousand ho useholds  in the CSICAP  municipalities, 7 o ut of 10 are headed by men, which 
is higher than the situation in rural areas of the country (68 .9%) (graph 0.2). Further, only 26 .0% 
 
1 The departments selected for the implementation of the chains a re as follows : 
Rice : Antioquia, Casanare, Cesar, Córdoba, Huila, La Guajira, Magdalena, Meta, Norte de Santander, Sucre Tolima, Valle del Cauca.  
Risaralda, Santander, Tolima y Valle del Cauca.  
Banan a: Antioquia, Cesar, La Guajira y Magdalena.  
Sugarcane : Antioquia, Boyacá, Caldas, Caquetá, Cauca, Cundinamarca, Huila, Nariño, Norte de Santander y Quindío,  
Corn : Antioquia, Cesar, Córdoba, Huila, La G uajira, Meta, Quindío, Risaralda, Santander y Tolima.  
Potato : Antioquia, Bogotá, Boyacá, Caldas, Cauca, Cundinamarca, Nariño, Norte de Santander, Santander, Tolima y Valle del Cauca.  
Cattle : Antioquia, Arauca, Caquetá, Cauca, La Guajira, Meta, Nariño, Sant ander y Sucre.  
2 The population of the municipalities o f the CSICAP  project are represented in the graph with filled bars; while  the national rural 
information is shown in the bars without filling and with dark outline.  25% 20% 15% 10% 5% 0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25%Entre 0 y 9 añosEntre 10 y 19 añosEntre 20 y 29 añosEntre 30 y 39 añosEntre 40 y 49 añosEntre 50 y 59 añosEntre 60 y 69 añosEntre 70 y 79 años80 o más años
Nacional Mujer LECRA Mujer Nacional Hombre LECRA Hombre


---
*Page 116*
---

6 
 of female -headed households live with a spouse, while 33.9% of female -heads of household  are 
single, 24 .9% are widow ed, and 24 .1% are separated ( common -law or marri ed). This reflects  
that in most of  these household s, women are the head of household , which increases the 
household’s  risk of falling into poverty since  women earn  less income than men to support  their  
dependents. In contrast, 72 .0% of male -headed households live with their spouse, 40 .4% of male  
head s of hou sehold are in  a union , and 30 .6% are married.  
Graph 0.2. Sex  of the head of house hold . Rural area . CSICAP  municipalities and rural national . 2018  
 
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2020b)  
Now , from Social Conpes 150 of 2012 , the Multidimensional Poverty Index was defined  to 
establish the absence of desired  social conditions of households and individuals , by identifying 
simultaneous deficiencies  in the dimensions of educational conditions of the household3, 
conditions of children  and youth4, work5, health6 and household s ervices and housing7 
conditions . 
In view of the above, and based on  DANE (2020c), it is identified that , of the 10,38 million rural 
people in the CSICAP8 departments , 3,47 million are in a condition of multidimensional poverty, 
corresponding to  33.5%, a figure lower than the national situation (34 .5%). To capture  territorial 
differences, Map 1 presents the adjusted MPI calculated by DANE from the 2018 National 
Population and Housing Census. It shows that  47.3% of the municipalities prioritized by the 
CSICAP  project have multidimensional poverty incidence rates between 40% and 60% and the 
overall average is 43 .4%. Most of the country’s municipalities with the highest levels of rural 
poverty  (above 60%) are  not part of the project, and the average adjusted rural MPI for the rest 
of the municipalities Is estimated at 54 .0%. Therefore, in terms of poverty conditions, the 
prioritized municipalities are in a better situation compared with the rest of the country ’s rural 
territory.  
  
 
3 The educational conditions of t he household are analyzed in terms of low educational achievement and illiteracy.  
4 The conditions of children a nd youth are analyz ed based on school absenteeism, school lag, barriers to access to early childhood 
care services , and child labor.  
5 Labor conditions are analyzed b ased on long -term unemployment and informal employment.  
6 Health conditions are analyzed through health insurance and barriers to access to health services.  
7 Public services and housing conditions are analyzed base s on access to an improved water source, inadequate excreta disposal, 
inadequate floors, inadequat e exterior walls , and critical overcrowding . 
8 A CSICAP  department is one  that has at least one municipality to intervene in the project.  68,9%69,8%
31,1%30,2%
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%NacionalMunicipios LECRA
Hombre Mujer


---
*Page 117*
---

7 
 Map 1. Adjusted Rural Multidimensional Poverty Index . 2018  
 
Panel A. Na tional  
 
  
Panel B.  CSICAP  Municipalities  
 
 
 
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2020 ) 
 
  
 
Regarding poverty status  according to the gender of the head of household , graph 0.3 shows 
that 34 .6% of the rural female -headed households are considered multidimensional poor, 
compared to 27 .7% of male -headed households. The main deprivations affecting female -headed 
househol ds correspond to informal work (91 .9%), low educational attainment (75 .5%), limited 
access to an improved water source (38 .5%), and school lag (32 .9%). However, when compared 
to male -headed households, there is a large difference in long -lasting unemployme nt (6 .6% for 
male -headed households and 21 .8% for female -headed households), which reflects the 
restrictions on women’s entry into the labor market.


---
*Page 118*
---

8 
 Graph 0.3. Percentage of households l iving in multidimensional poverty according to the sex of the head of 
household. Rural area. CSICAP  department and rural national. 2019  
 
 
 
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (2020 c) 
 
Similarly, when analyzing the condition of monetary poverty, which represents the percentage 
of people who do not have enough per capita income to cover the basic basket of goods and 
services, it is identified that in the CSICAP  departments, 34 .6% of the rural population faces this 
situation, which is lower than the national rural poverty rate(36 .1%). Additionally, based on 
DANE (2019) it is estimated that of the 2,1 million rural households headed by men, 26 .8% are 
income poor, which is below the 33 .8% of poor households headed by women (673,8 thousand 
house holds). This situation is explained by the lower income -generating capacity of female -
headed households (with an income of 959,8 thousand, in contrast to 1,1 million male -headed 
households).  
 
Graph 1.4. Percentage of households in monetary poverty accordi ng to the sex of the head of household. Rural 
área. CSICAP  department and rural national. 2018  
 
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (20 19) 
 
Therefore, the gender gaps, both in the quality of life (represented by multidimensional poverty) 
and in the capacity to generate income (monetary poverty), are evidence of the feminization of 
poverty in rural areas of the country and the CSICAP  departments. Regarding the educational 
conditions of the rural population,  DANE (2020B) identifies that of the 2,0 million people over 
15 years of age living in the CSICAP  municipalities, 12 .1% do not know how to read or write. This 
rate is lower than the national rural rate (11 .9%), and it is similar between men and women 
(12.2% and 12 .0% respectively). When analyzing educational levels by gender, women have 27,7%34,6%
28,9%35,4%
0%5%10%15%20%25%30%35%40%
Hombre Mujer Hombre Mujer
Departamentos LECRA NacionalHogares pobres 
multidimensioanles
26,8%33,8%
27,9%35,0%
0%5%10%15%20%25%30%35%40%
Hombre Mujer Hombre Mujer
Departamentos LECRA NacionalHogares pobres por 
ingreso


---
*Page 119*
---

9 
 higher levels of education than men: 22 .8% have high school education and 10 .6%  have higher 
education; while 19 .8% of men have vocational secondary education and 8 .1% have higher 
education. However, more than 50% of the population does not have basic secondary education, 
showing strong restrictions for the accumulation of human capital in rural areas of the country.  
 
Graph 1.5. The educational level attained by sex. Rural area. Over 15 years of age. CSICAP  municipalities and rural 
national. 2018  
 
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (20 20b)  
 
In terms of the labor market, the population that is part of the labor force totals 7,7 million for 
the CSICAP  departments, of which 57 .1% are employed and 18.6% are employed in household 
occupations. When analyzing activity according to sex (graph 0.4), there are large differences 
between men and women: while 74 .2% of men are considered employed, for wome n this figure 
does not exceed 37 .5%. In addition, 38 .0% of the female population is employed in household 
occupations, while the participation of men is barely 1 .5%. 
These figures reflect that, even though  rural women have on average a higher level of education 
than men, care services in rural a reas fall on women and limit their labor participation, which 
has an impact on their limited capacity to generate income, affecting their economic 
empowerment.  
Graph 0.4. Labor force activity by sex. Rural area. CSICAP  departments an d rural national . 2018  
 
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (20 19) 
Also , in the CSICAP  departments, 69 .3% of those employed are men and 30 .7% are women (                                                                                                                                                                        10,2%
8,3%
11,6%
8,9%5,1%
6,3%
5,1%
7,3%40,3%
35,8%
39,0%
34,4%16,5%
16,2%
16,6%
16,6%19,8%
22,8%
19,5%
22,4%8,1%
10,6%
8,1%
10,4%
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%Hombre
Mujer
Hombre
MujerMunicipio
LECRA Nacional
Ninguno Preescolar Básica primaria Básica secundaria Media Superior
74,2%
37,5%
73,8%
36,8%15,4%
15,7%
16,1%
16,2%1,5%
38,0%
1,7%
38,8%
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%Hombre
Mujer
Hombre
MujerDepartamento
LECRA Nacional
Ocupado Aspirante Cesante Estudiante Oficios del hogar Incapacitado Otra


---
*Page 120*
---

10 
 graph  0.5). This shows the preponderance of men in the development of productive activities in 
rural areas, both in these departments and at the national le vel. Additionally, there are large 
differences between the incomes earned by men and women in the agricultural s ector . 
Specifically, in the agricultur e, livestock , and hunting subsector, men’s average income 
corresponds to 74 .5% of the current legal monthly m inimum wage (smmlv9 for its acronym in 
Spanish), while women’s average income is 33.5% of 1 smmlv. When analyzing these data 
according to the occupational position, it is identified that employees earn the highest labor 
income (131% of 1 smmlv for men and 106% for women), fo llowed by the employer (129% for 
men and 98,2% for women), day laborers (99% for men and 64% for women), and, finally, self -
employed workers, who earn the lowest income in the sector (57% of 1 smmlv for men an d 34% 
for women)                                                                                                                                                                        
Graph 0.5. Percentage of employed by sex. Rural area. CSICAP  departments and rural national . 2018  
 
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (20 19) 
 
However, identifying  the unemployment rate shows that while men have an unemployment rate 
of 3.2% in the CSICAP  departments, the rate for women is 9 .9% ( similar to the national rate). 
Therefore, the labor market in rural areas does not manage to absorb the supply of women’s 
jobs. This situation is related to the structure of the rural economy, where agricultural and 
livestock activities predominate, in whi ch male paid labor prevails. Nevertheless, rural women 
participate in these tasks as unpaid family workers and care economy activities closely related 
to agricultural production, such as the production, transformation , and supply of food for self -
consumpti on and day laborers, and animal care.  
  
 
9 This is the minimum legally established payment that a person receives per month for their work, it is currently 908.526 COP in 
Colombia.  69,3%
69,6%30,7%
30,4%
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%Departamento LECRA
Nacional
Hombre Mujer


---
*Page 121*
---

11 
 Graph 0.6. Unemployment rate by sex. Rural are. CSICAP  departments and rural national . 2018  
 
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (20 19) 
In this sense, and thanks to Law 1413 of 2013, the importance of unpaid work performed at 
home that is not usua lly accounted for (housing maintenance, care of household or community 
members, and maintenance of the paid labor force) is recognized, and the role of rural women 
in the economic and social development of their communities is beginning to become evident. 
In this regard, 37 .1% of rural women carry out activities included in the System of National 
Accounts (SNA) with a daily destination of 4:50 hours , and 92 .5% carry out activities not included 
in the SNA for 07:52 hours. On the other hand, 65 .5% of men perform SNA activities (8:25 hours) 
and 60 .5% perform non -SNA activities (3:06 hours). In other words, women work more hours 
per day than men (12:42 hours vs 11:31 hour s, respectively), but approximately two -thirds of 
them are spent on domestic and unpaid care activities, while men spend less than one -third of 
their working time on these activities.  
Among the work activities n ot included in the System of National Account s are: i) providing food 
to household members; ii) maintaining clothing for household members; iii) cleaning, 
maintenance , and repairs for the household; iv) household purchases and administration; v) care 
activities with children under 5 years of age belo nging to the household; vi) support for 
household members; and vii) passive care (being on standby). The gender gaps in each of these 
areas are presented below.  
First, concerning to providing f ood to members of the household10  (preparing and serving food; 
lifting and washing dishes at home; preparing canned food, cheese or sausages; or taking food 
to people at their place of work or study) , in rural areas of the country, 22 .9% of men perform 
these activities compared to 81 .3% o f women (graph 0.7). The regions with the greatest 
differences are the Atlantic region (17 .4% of men and 82 .5% of women) and the Central region 
(19.2% of men and 80 .9% of women). On the other hand, the Eastern and Pacific regions show 
higher participation of men (29 .1% and 27 .1% respectively).  
  
 
10 Since the CSICAP  Project will b e implemented in all regions, a disaggregated description is provided for each region.  3,2%9,9%
3,0%9,6%
0%2%4%6%8%10%12%
Hombre Mujer Hombre Mujer
Departamento LECRA NacionalTasa de desempleo


---
*Page 122*
---

12 
 Graph 0.7. Participation in activities of supplies to household members by sex and region. 2016 -2017
 
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (20 16-2017)  
graph 0.8 also shows the time rural men and women spend on these activities: men spend 67 
minutes on these activities, while women more  than double this figure with 147 minutes. The 
region with the lowe st time spent i n the Pacific regi on (52 minutes for men and 125 minutes for 
women), while in the Central regi on men spend 74 minutes and women 160 minute s. 
Graph 0.8. Time spent  in activities of supplies to household members  by sex and region . 2016 -2017  
 
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (20 16-2017)  
Second, concerning the pa rticipation in clothing maintenance (washing, ironing , or putting away 
the clothes from household members; repairing clothes, tablecloths, blankets, footwear, 
suitcases; making clothes; and taking or picking up clothes from the laundry), only 9 .6% of rural 
men perform these activities, compared to 49 .2% of women  (graph 0.9). Similarly, food supply 
shows that the Atlantic regi on is t he one where men perform these activities the least, with 
4.3%; women’s participation is 42 .6%. On the other hand, the Pacific region is the one where 
the maintenance of clothing presents the highest participation of men with 16 .3% and 51 .9% of 
women.  
  17,4% 19,2%29,1% 27,1%22,9%82,5% 80,9% 81,9% 79,9% 81,3%
0%20%40%60%80%100%
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica Total
Hombre Mujer
79 74 69
5267144160 157
125147
050100150200
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica TotalMinutos
Hombre Mujer


---
*Page 123*
---

13 
 Graph 0.9. Participation in wardrobe maintenance activities of household members  by sex and region . 2016 -2017  
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (20 16-2017)  
Regarding the time allocated to these activities, on average, rural men spend 44 minutes and 
women spend twice as much, 87 minutes (graph 0.10). Although the participation of men in the 
Atlantic región is low, the time allocated is the highest with 63 minutes, and women spend 120 
minutes. On the other hand, the Pacific región shows lower  periods with 37 minutes for men 
and 70 minutes for women.  
Graph 0.10. Time spent  on wardrobe maintenance activities of household members by sex and region . 2016 -2017  
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (20 16-2017)  
Thirdly, regarding the participation in household cleaning and maintenance (corresponding to 
cleaning the house, caring for pets and the garden, cleaning vehicles, fetching water or fuel for 
cooking at home), 33 .6% of men living in rural areas carry out these activities  compared to 76 .6% 
of rural women  (graph 0.11). The greatest difference according to the sex of the person is in the 
Central zone wh ere 25 .6% of men and 77 .8% of women perform some of the actions for 
household cleaning and  maintenance. In the Atlantic, Eastern , and Pacific regions, the behavior 
is similar. The smallest difference is in th e Eastern regi on with 37 .5% of men and 76 .0% of 
women.  
  4,3%7,7%10,7%16,3%
9,6%42,6%54,9%
46,4%51,9%49,2%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica Total
Hombre Mujer
63
46 443744120
83787087
020406080100120140
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica TotalMinutos
Hombre Mujer


---
*Page 124*
---

14 
 Graph 0.11. Participation in household cleaning and maintenance activities b y sex and region . 2016 -2017  
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (20 16-2017) 
Similarly,  graph 0.12 shows how people spend their time on thes e activities. On average, men 
spend 59 minutes and women 85 minutes. The Pacific regi on is the one where both men and 
women spend the least amount of time, with 47 minutes for men and 71 minutes for women. 
The Central regi on shows the greatest difference in participation and in ti me as well, with men 
spending 66 minutes and women 102 minute s.  
Graph 0.12. Time spent  on household cleaning and maintenance activities b y sex and region . 2016 -2017  
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (20 16-2017)  
Fourth, concerning  the participation in household purchasing and administration activities 
(purchasing personal items, buying or claiming medicines, d irecting or supervising household 
activities, paying bills, looking for housing to rent or buy, collecting subsidies for some one, or 
moving to carry out one of the activities), the percentage of men and women who carry out 
these activities is  similar (17 .0% and 17 .3% respectively) ( graph 0.13). The regi on with the 
greatest difference is the Atlantic regi on, where 17 .1% of men and 19 .9% of women engage in 
purchasing and management activities. It is worth mentioning the Pacific region, since 20 .7% of 
men report carrying out these activities, while the participation of women is 19 .0%.  
  36,0%
25,6%37,5% 36,8%33,6%76,2% 77,8% 76,0% 76,0% 76,6%
0%20%40%60%80%100%
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica Total
Hombre Mujer
7066
54475978102
85
7185
020406080100120
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica TotalMinutos
Hombre Mujer


---
*Page 125*
---

15 
 Graph 0.13. Participation in shopping and household management activities by  sex and region . 2016 -2017  
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (20 16-2017)  
Likewise, the time spent by the population is similar, as shown in graph 0.14, with men spending 
85 minutes and women 78 minutes. By region, the Central region has the longest time s pent, 
with 125 minutes for men and 117 minutes for women. On the other hand, the Pacific  region -
despite not be ing the region that spends the least time - is the one with the greatest similarity 
between the two sexes (77 minutes for men and 78 minutes for women).  
Graph 0.14. Time spent o n shopping household and management activities by  sex and region . 2016 -2017 2016 -
2017  
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (20 16-2017) 
In fifth place, graph 0.15 shows participation in activities with children under 5 years of age in 
the household (such as playing, telling,  or reading stories, or taking them to the park), according 
to which 11.4% of me n and 19.0% of women carry out caregiving activities. The highest 
participation is found in the Pacific regi on, with 13.7% of men and 23.3% of women. The Atlantic 
region has the lowest percentage (10.2% of men and 16.5% of women).  
  17,1%
14,3%16,3%20,7%
17,0%19,9%
13,8%17,2%19,0%17,3%
0%5%10%15%20%25%
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica Total
Hombre Mujer
58125
79 7785
51117
7078 78
 - 20,0 40,0 60,0 80,0 100,0 120,0 140,0
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica TotalMinutos
Hombre Mujer


---
*Page 126*
---

16 
 Graph 0.15. Participation in activities with children under 5 years of age i n the household by sex and region . 
2016 -2017  
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (20 16-2017)  
In terms of time s pent on this activity, women spend an average of 82 minutes and men 78 
minutes. Nevertheless, regional differences are evident: in the Atlantic region, the time spent 
by men is 91 minutes, while for women it is 75 minutes. In the Central and Eastern regions, the 
additional time spent by women is around 15 minutes. In the Pacific region, the time spent by 
both sexes is homogeneous.  
Graph 0.16. Time spent  in activities with children under 5 years of age i n the household by sex and region . 2016 -
2017 
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (20 16-2017) 
Sixth, 8.2% of women and 5.0% of men perform support activities for household members 
(taking or bringing minor an d those over 12 years of age to their place of study or work, or taking 
people from the household to social, cultural,  or recreational events ) (graph 0.17). In the case 
of the Central regi on, the number of people who perform these activities is low (2.3% of men 
and 5.0% of women), while in the Pacific region it is more common (13.5% of women and  8.1% 
of men).  
  10,2%11,6%10,2%13,7%
11,4%16,5%18,0% 18,5%23,3%
19,0%
0%5%10%15%20%25%
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica Total
Hombre Mujer
91
79746978 759389
7082
020406080100
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica TotalMinutos
Hombre Mujer


---
*Page 127*
---

17 
 Graph 0.17. Participation in activities supporting household members by sex  and region . 2016 -2017  
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (20 16-2017)  
In terms of time spent, rural men spend about 38 minutes and women 35 minute s (graph 0.18). 
Likewise, in the case of the Atlantic, Eastern and Pacific regions, there is homogeneity in the 
time spent by individuals. In the Central region, however, there is a significant difference 
between the sexes, with men spending 51 minutes an d women 32 minutes.  
Graph 0.18. Participation in activities supporting household members by sex  and region . 2016 -2017  
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (20 16-2017) 
Finally, taking care  of other members of the household is an activity carried out mainly by 
women (37.4%)  (graph  0.19). The gender gap is similar for the Atlantic and  Central regions, 
where women’s participation is close to 33% and men’s is 10%.  The Pacific region is the one with 
the highest participation rates (19.4% of men and 44.2% of women).  
Graph  0.19. Participation in activities of taking care of household members by sex and region. 2016 -2017  
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (20 16-2017) 4,8%
2,3%5,4%8,1%
5,0%6,3%
5,0%10,0%13,5%
8,5%
0%2%4%6%8%10%12%14%16%
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica Total
Hombre Mujer
3751
42
313840
3235 34 35
0102030405060
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica TotalMinutos
Hombre Mujer
9,4% 10,4%15,8%19,4%
13,5%32,5% 33,6%39,9%44,2%
37,4%
0%10%20%30%40%50%
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica Total
Hombre Mujer


---
*Page 128*
---

18 
 It is worth noting that this activity is the one that shows the greatest dedication of time for both 
men and women. As shown in Graph 1.22, women spend 387 minutes on passive caregiving and 
men 288 minutes. In the Eastern region, women spend 520 minutes and men 441 minutes. 
Meanwhile, the region that spends the least t ime is the Central region with 340 and 206 minutes 
for women and men, respectively.  
Graph 0.20. Time spent in activities of taking care of household members by sex and region  2016 -2017  
 
Source: Prepared by the authors based on DANE (20 16-2017) 
 
2. Characterization of production chains from a gender perspective  
 
This chapter analyzes the production conditions, from a gender and ethnic perspective, in each 
of the prioritized chains: rice, bananas, coffee, panela cane, sugarcane, cattle, corn, and 
potatoes.  
In general, issues and problems, both general and specific to each production chain, are 
summarized in Table 2.1 and must be considered in the Gender Action Plan and the Project’s 
Environ mental and Social Management Framework, following the guidelines dictated by the 
regulations and policies on equity for women described in the following chapter.   
Table 0.1. Summary of production c onditions by  sex of the producer and production chain  
Component  Sex of the 
producer  Rice  Banan a Coffee  Sugarcane  Panela 
Cane  Potato  Corn  Cattle  
Decision -
making  Men  55,1%  71,8%  58,2%  54,4%  55,3%  53,5%  64,7%  63,8%  
Women  17,7%  8,8%  20,0%  24,8%  23,1%  18,6%  16,9%  18,3%  
Mixed * 11,0%  13,7%  15,5%  18,4%  11,1%  16,0%  7,8%  22,4%  
Average size of 
the UPA 
(estate .) Men  40,6 ha  16,0 ha  15,0 ha  6,0 ha  7,2 ha  7,7 ha  30,6 ha  72,7 ha  
Women  27,6 ha  29,9 ha  8,4 ha  3,2 ha  4,5 ha  4,3 ha  18,4 ha  29,5 ha  
Mixed  28,6 ha  10,5 ha  10,9 ha  5,2 ha  7,7 ha  7,2 ha  38,9 ha  22,0 ha  
Acces s to 
technical 
assistance  Men  25,8%  61,5%  61,9%  59,3%  35,5%  15,3%  21,9%  16,7%  
Women  20,4%  55,9%  56,1%  51,0%  27,5%  9,8%  16,1%  16,2%  
Mixed  33,9%  37,2%  62,0%  57,3%  43,6%  25,2%  23,7%  34,8%  
Access to 
credit  Men  18,6%  6,6%  18,9%  14,5%  18,2%  24,1%  14,6%  16,9%  
Women  11,9%  7,5%  16,3%  10,5%  15,1%  19,3%  13,6%  18,3%  
Mixed  27,9%  4,8%  24,2%  20,1%  19,7%  36,6%  14,4%  37,7%  
Access to 
information 
and 
communication 
technologies  Men  72,4%  77,3%  60,2%  59,9%  60,9%  59,6%  76,7%  61,1%  
Women  81,9%  89,6%  65,9%  60,0%  66,9%  66,2%  84,4%  65,2%  
Mixed  83,1%  97,3%  81,3%  81,2%  81,5%  81,2%  86,3%  80,6%  260
206441
229288342 340520
346387
0100200300400500600
Atlántico Central Oriental Pacífica TotalMinutos
Hombre Mujer


---
*Page 129*
---

19 
 Earned income  Men  Average income for the agricultur e, livestock and hunting subsector: 74.5% of the current legal 
monthly minimum  wage.  
Average income of employee 131% of the smmlv, employer 129% of th e smmlv, day laborer 99% 
of the smmlv and self -employed 57% of the smmlv.   
Women  Average income for the agricultur e, livestock and hunting subsector: 33.5% of the current legal 
monthly minimum wage.  
Average income of employee 1 06% of the smmlv, employer 98% of th e smmlv, day laborer 64% 
of the smmlv  and self -employed 34% of the smmlv.  
*Note: Mixed refers to a gricultural production units (APU) in which men and women participate jointly in decision -making.  
Source: Prepared by the authors.  
 
Among the elements of the diagnosis, it should be noted that, in general, social norms, gender 
stereotypes, and patriarchal relations, among others, have normalized the fact that domestic 
work and unpaid care work are activities that fall on rural women, which considerably limits 
their participation in labor an d decision -making in agricultural production units. On average, 
women participate considerably less in decision -making in production units, at 18.5% compared 
to 59.6% for men. The banana, corn, rice, livestock, and potato chains have the lowest 
proportion of production units headed by women (less than 20% and, in the case of bananas, 
the figure does not exceed 10%)  
Similarly, in terms of access to land, the size of production units in the municipalities prioritized 
for the CSICAP  project is higher than the n ational average. However, the analysis revealed 
gender gaps not only about land ownership but also concerning size, where on average the size 
of the land owned by women producers corresponds to 72.9% of the size of the land owned by 
men (the greatest diffe rences are found mainly in the cattle chain, where it is only 41%).  
Production factors, such as access to technical assistance and credit, condition access to other 
production factors, considerably limit the production possibilities of women farmers and 
ranchers. This is the case, for example, of potato producers who receive technical assistance, of 
whom only 9.8% are women. In the corn and livestock chains, women account for 16% of the 
producers receiving assistance. In the rice and sugarcane chains, thi s percentage is between 20% 
and 30%, while in the banana, coffee, and sugarcane chains, it is between 50% and 60%. In 
addition, regarding the management of production systems and technical assistance, including 
the topics taught through this service, there  are some differences in behavior according to the 
sex of the producers. This reflects the importance of working in a participatory way with the 
different beneficiaries of the CSICAP  project and, in this process, incorporating the gender 
approach.  
Regarding  the access to credit, less than 20% -regardless of the crop - were able to receive some 
method of financing for production. Besides, except for bananas and livestock, the gender gap 
in access to credit persists among male and female producers in the other c hains.  
Therefore, the figures show that, in general, there is less access to productive factors by female 
producers who make production decisions on their own. This situation has repercussions on 
rural women’s ability to generate income. Indeed, not only i s the income received by farmers 
and ranchers in the country significantly low, but the gender gap is also quite wide: while men 
earn, on average, 74.5% of the current legal monthly minimum wage (smmlv), the figure for 
women is no more than 33.5%. Furtherm ore, the data show that the income gap is present in 
all occupations (employee, employer, day laborer, and self -employed).


---
*Page 130*
---

20 
 This situation, added to the greater vulnerability and poverty levels of rural women who are 
heads of household (35.0% of female -headed households are in monetary poverty and 35.4% in 
multidimensional poverty, and 27.9% of male -headed households are in monetary poverty, and 
28.9% in multidimensional poverty), makes this population group one that requires special 
attention to help close  gender gaps.  
Concerning ethnic groups, most of the ones that have a presence in the prioritized municipalities 
are indigenous. It was also identified that the participation of women and mixed producers tends 
to be higher in ethnic groups, especially in in digenous groups. To access productive factors and 
management practices of productive systems, wide gaps were identified according to ethnicity. 
In addition, peasant producers and those belonging to ethnic groups currently implement 
production and conservat ion practices that are culturally rooted, several of which should be 
recognized and incorporated into the CSICAP  project to generate trust and at the same time 
promote appropriation and social construction of knowledge. To the above is added the low 
digital  connectivity of the territories participating in the Project and the fact that the changes 
entail economic risks that may be difficult for small producers to manage. These and other 
factors put at risk the adoption by the beneficiaries of the knowledge, t echnology, practices, and 
models that are expected to be disseminated through CSICAP . 
It is also important t o note the demographic pressure on the Colombian countryside, which is 
not foreign to the municipalities where the CSICAP  project will be implemented. In all the chains 
studied, the majority (over 64%) of producers are over 60 years of age (¡Error! No se encuentra 
el origen de la referencia. ). This imposes challenges, not only in terms of promoting change, 
adopting knowledge and new technologies, and the communication and implementation 
methods us ed with these users.  
Table  2.2. Percentage of producers over 60 years of age in the prioritized municipalities by the production chain  
Productive chain  % of producers over 60 
years o ld 
Rice  80,2%  
Banan a 68,2%  
Sugarcane  64,4%  
Panela cane  79,4%  
Potato  79,7%  
Corn  71,7%  
Cattle  67,2%  
Source: Prepared by the authors  
3. Capaci ties of the Producer Associations  to manage gender issues  
 
About the capacities of the nine Producer Associations  participating in the CSICAP  Project to 
manage gender issues, most of the entities do not have institutionalized channels, instruments, 
and resources to promote gender equity; however, some practices and projects developed with 
rural women demonstrate an in terest in incorporating these issues. In general, it is essential to 
strengthening the capacities of these entities to guarantee the implementation of the Gender


---
*Page 131*
---

21 
 Action Plan of the CSICAP  Project, as well as the sustainability of its results in the long ter m. The 
following are the main conclusions regarding the institutional capacities of each guild.  
Producer Associations  such as Fenalce, Asocaña, Fedepapa, and Fedearroz  have not 
implemented policies and do not have a gender action plan. This has impacted the functioning 
of the strategic plans and follow -up tools since no guideline allows observing the differentiated 
needs of both women and producers belonging to ethnic c ommunities. However, despite not 
having a gender policy, it is important to highlight that Fedepapa has 68.2% of female workers 
within the guild, and 40% of its extensionists are women. Concerning this, Fedepapa is the only 
union with these figures. On the  other hand, Fedearroz and Asozaña, despite having salary 
equity policies, do not meet with affirmative measures to improve the access of female 
producers to agricultural extension activities, and therefore the efforts made to establish inter -
institutional  links to promote programs or projects that benefit female members are not 
included in the institutional plan established by the unions, which may prove to impede the 
recurrence of this type of projects. In other words, the lack of a general framework on e quity 
and gender does not guarantee the sustainability of these actions or their harmonization with 
objectives to close gaps in the long term.  
Regarding the inclusion of the differential approach, Producer Associations  such as Fenalce and 
Fedearroz have no t established policies to promote projects, programs, or policies to encourage 
the participation of ethnic communities belonging to their respective production chains. This is 
shown in the percentages of people on the board of directors, the project formul ation teams, 
and the absence of areas whose function is to address issues related to the differential and 
gender approach. It may be that many of these affirmative actions are seen as a form of 
discrimination by the associations, as mentioned in some of th e interviews. Therefore, the idea 
is that "equity" means providing all members with the same opportunities, without recognizing 
the different difficulties that vulnerable populations may have in accessing them.  
On the other hand, Producer Associations  with  impact in regions with a high presence of ethnic 
communities have consolidated efforts to integrate differential approaches into the internal 
processes of the guild, such as Fedepapa, which has carried out activities or projects aimed at 
improving the con ditions of ethnic producers in the chain. This has been possible because they 
have disaggregated information on their members since they have membership forms that 
specify different aspects of the producers, which allows for a detailed record of the associ ated 
population and their production conditions.  
Equally, unions such as Fenalce, Asocaña, Fedepapa, and Fedearroz  scored below 40% in the 
financial capacity component with a gender perspective. This may be due mainly to the lack of 
a gender equity policy or a differential approach to recognize the importance of having 
budgetary markers associated with the affirmative  actions that are carried out. The involvement 
of women in production processes requires not only differentiated technical assistance but also 
access to credit and an institutional budget for this purpose, as a way of establishing a 
commitment from the gui ld to women and supporting their projects within the chain. In addition 
to the monitoring, follow -up, and evaluation component, these associations do not have 
information on the number of women extensionists, people from ethnic communities, or the 
number o f women members. The lack of disaggregated information on the people working in


---
*Page 132*
---

22 
 the Producer Associations  or associated producers is a flaw since it does not provide relevant 
information for the design of projects, programs, and labor -union policies with a  differential 
approach.  
On the other hand, Producer Associations  such as Fedenapela, ASBAMA, and the National 
Federation of Coffee Growers (FNC) were characterized for having high scores regarding the 
components with a differential and gender approach. The se Producer Associations  have an 
action plan or gender policies that are applied to strategic plans and follow -up tools, and 
therefore have policies to promote equity and affirmative measures, and in the cases of 
ASBAMA and the FNC, articulation, and finan cing processes have been carried out to benefit 
women producers and ethnic communities that participate in the production chain. In the same 
way, the last two mentioned Producer Associations  have disaggregated information on aspects 
such as the percentage of women members and the number of women working in the 
institution, although they omit information on the ethnic component. However, and despite the 
above, ASBAMA does not have regulations to promote participation regarding the inclusion of 
women on board s of directors and decision -making bodies, and Fedepanela does not have a 
budget designated for affirmative actions for female and male producers belonging to ethnic 
communities.  
Finally, the only guild that did not respond to the section referring to aspe cts related to the 
differential approach was Fedegan; however, from the qualitative work, it was evident that the 
importance of women within the production chain is recognized. To ensure this commitment to 
sustainable actions, it is necessary to implement specific policies and guidelines to promote 
equity and non -discrimination. About inter -institutional articulation processes, although no 
response was obtained, the interviews referred to projects developed in alliance with 
international actors, in which wo rk was carried out with women ranchers, in some cases victims 
of the armed conflict.  
 
4. Regulatory and gender policy framework of CSICAP  Project  
4.1 International Instruments  
Concerning gender equity and the guarantee of rights of women, Colombia has signed and 
ratified important international instruments. First, it is worth mentioning the 1979 Convention 
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women - CEDAW (approved by 
Colombia through Law 51 of 1981), which confirmed the country's commitment to the pursuit 
of gender equality and the definition of relevant measures to achieve it.  
Additionally, the country has participated in different international forums, such as the First 
International Conference on Women (Mexico, 1975), where the Decade for Women plan was 
signed; the Second World Conference on Women (Copenhagen, 1980), which emphasized the 
elimination of violence against women; the Third World Conference on Women (Nairobi, 1985); 
and the Fourth World Conference on Women (Beijing, 1 995), which established a platform of 
action for the rights of women.


---
*Page 133*
---

23 
 The above -mentioned conventions and conferences share the characteristic of recognizing the 
link between gender inequalities and the disproportionate effects of climate change on women, 
raising awareness of the need to adopt measures that are consistent with this situation and that 
improve the quality of life of women, while at the same time adopting measures to protect and 
restore ecosystems.  
Likewise, there are regional platforms in whi ch Colombia has participated, such as the 
Convention on the Prevention, Punishment, and Eradication of Violence against Women 
(Convention of Belém do Pará), which was ratified by Law 248 of 1995 and creates a regional 
instrument for the recognition of the full and free exercise of civil, political, economic, social, 
and cultural rights of women. Also, the Tenth Regional Conference on Women in Latin America 
and the Caribbean, organized by ECLAC, appeals to States to guarantee the participation of rural, 
indigenous, and Afro -descendant women in political life and paid work.  
Moreover, the Colombian government has signed a series of United Nations resolutions that are 
related to the quality of life of women, their role in the development, and their political 
participation: Resolution 66/216 (2012) and Resolution 66/130 (2012). Particularly, Resolutions 
62/136 (2008) and 64/140 (2009) are aimed at improving the situation of women in rural areas.  
Recently, the country has aligned itself with the Sustainable Develop ment Goals (SDGs) as a 
reference point for the formulation of public policy in the country. In particular, SDG 5 refers to 
gender equality, with a special emphasis on vulnerable women, such as rural women. Besides, 
other goals such as climate action, under water life, and terrestrial ecosystem life can be 
addressed from a gender perspective.  
4.2 National regulations and public policy  
There are two main groups of gender equity regulations at the national level: one focused on 
the protection of the rights of w omen and the other with special emphasis on rural women, 
their productive inclusion, and, in general, on creating tools for gender equity in rural areas of 
the country.   
Among the main laws that protect women's rights are Article 43 of the 1991 Political 
Constitution, which guarantees equal rights and opportunities between men and women; Law 
823 of 2003, which dictates norms on equal opportunities for women; Law 1232 of 2008, which 
defines female head of household; Law 1257 of 2008, which adopts norms to g uarantee women 
lives free of violence; and Law 1413 of 2010, or the Care Economy Law, which includes the care 
economy in the National Accounts System.  
Regarding the participation of women in decision -making spaces, Law 581 of 2000, or the Quota 
Law, establishes minimum participation of 30% of women in public decision -making positions 
and calls for the adoption of similar measures in the private sector an d civil society. This law has 
become a reference framework for the establishment of affirmative measures related to the 
minimum participation of women in government programs, for example, those related to 
productive projects.


---
*Page 134*
---

24 
 In 2013, through document CONPES 161, the National Public Policy on Gender Equity was 
adopted, to contribute to guarantee the full enjoyment of the rights of Colombian women. To 
this end, it promotes the mainstreaming of the gender approach in all sectors of the economy, 
giving spe cial attention to rural women.  
Law 731 of 2002, or the Rural Women's Law, aims to improve the quality of rural women and 
prioritizes low -income rural women. This is based on the definition of affirmative and favourable  
measures related to, among other aspe cts, i) access to financing (from which the Credit Line for 
Low-Income Rural Women was created), ii) the titling of agrarian reform lands equitably for 
women and their spouses, and iii) participation (of at least 30%) in reforestation and 
environmental rec overy projects. Thirteen years after the disclosure of this law, Decree 2369 of 
2015 was signed, creating the Directorate of Rural Women in the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Development, responsible for ensuring the welfare of rural women.  
On women's right to land ownership, there are several norms. Decree -Law 902 of 2017 
establishes the joint titling of vacant and fiscal patrimonial lands for spouses or permanent 
partners and recognizes care activities as activities for the use of rural lands for land  
adjudication. In turn, Law 1900 establishes that the Family Agricultural Units on vacant land will 
be awarded to spouses or permanent partners. Additionally, MADR Resolution 311 of 2019, 
which regulates Law 1900 of 2018, establishes prioritization criteri a for rural women for the 
adjudication of vacant, based on their conditions of poverty and marginality. Besides, Resolution 
12096 of 2019 and Agreement 0058 of 2018 of the National Land Agency, establish criteria 
related to the care economy, the female hea d of household, and belonging to women's 
organizations to prioritize women in the processes of access and formalization to land 
ownership.  
Similarly, Law 1448 of 2011 or Victims Law established that women have special protection from 
the State in procedure s associated with land restitution, such as preferential access to credit, 
training, and social security programs.  
It is also worth mentioning that, regarding productive activities, Article 8 of Law 1900 of 2018 
establishes that the gender approach must be  included and guarantee priority access to rural 
women, especially those who are heads of household, to the different funds, plans, and 
programs related to productive projects of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 
and other entities that fav or rural activity. Similarly, for productive projects, the aforementioned 
article recognizes the activities of care and unpaid domestic work as rural activities.  In the same 
sense, the Regulations of the Comprehensive Agricultural and Rural Development Pr ojects 
(PIDAR for its acronym in Spanish) of the Rural Development Agency, adopted by Agreement 
010 of 2019, amended by Agreement 004 of 2020, establishes that rural women are part of the 
five population groups subject to differential attention.  
In terms of agricultural extension, Law 1876 of 2017 created the National Agricultural Innovation 
System (SNIA for its acronym in Spanish) and defines the public agricultural extension service as 
a service with a differential approach that, among other asp ects, will ensure comprehensive 
assistance that includes the sustainable management of natural resources and the promotion of 
practices for mitigating and adapting to climate change. In this context, the law establishes


---
*Page 135*
---

25 
 affirmative and favorable measures f or rural women, such as their prioritization as beneficiaries 
of the subsidy for the public agricultural extension service fee, the promotion of the 
development of organizations of female producers, and their participation in the SNIA's Superior 
Council th rough a rural woman representative.  
Another important norm regarding the welfare of rural women is Resolution 464 of 2017 on 
public policy guidelines for Peasant, Family and Community Agriculture (ACFC for its acronym in 
Spanish), which recognizes the fundamental role of rural women in the A CFC, which constitutes 
75% of the country's Agricultural Units.   
Moreover, the Bases of the National Development Plan (PND for its acronym in Spanish) 2018 -
2022, throughout Chapter XIV presents the Pact for the Equity of Women, whose objective is 
the crea tion of a National System of Women and the creation of the National Care System, 
through the Intersectoral Commission of the Care System, recognizing the need for differential 
policies for rural women. Furthermore, the PND 2018 -2022 is a pioneer in the cre ation of a 
budget tracer for the equity of women, which seeks that all public entities that receive resources 
from the General Budget of the Nation have identified their investments and commitments to 
close the gaps between men and women, both in investmen t and operation.  
In line with the roadmap established in the PND 2018 -2022, state strategies to address rural 
women and their needs have been promoted and implemented by entities at the national public 
level, such as the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural D evelopment, with the leadership of its 
Directorate for Rural Women, as well as the National Land Agency (ANT for its acronym in 
Spanish) and the Rural Development Agency (ADR for its acronym in Spanish), and, in some 
cases, with the help of international c ooperation and other civil society organizations. These 
strategies have been developed under the 2013 National Public Policy on Gender Equity for 
Women, whose six main axes are: 1) Peacebuilding and cultural transformation; 2) Economic 
autonomy and access to assets; 3) Participation in power and decision -making scenarios; 4) 
Sexual and reproductive health and rights; 5) Gender focus in education; and, finally, 6) A life 
free of violence. Similarly, to close the socioeconomic gaps between the sexes, the Pres idential 
Advisory Office for Women's Equity also articulates with entities at the national and territorial 
levels, promoting the creation of territorial links to promote gender -focused policy in the 
territories. These institutional efforts have taken shape  in the development of projects, the 
signing of pacts, the expansion of coverage, and the injection of resources in the areas of 
associativity, technology, access to land, technical assistance, among others.  
Among the recently implemented programs, Colombi a Siembra stands out, executed from 2015 
to 2018, which proposed to increase the supply of agricultural products for the country and 
promote agricultural exports. Although this policy was aimed at all actors in the production 
chain, one of its objectives w as to historically increase the support and participation of women 
in the country's agricultural sector. Thus, Colombia Siembra favored nearly 506,264 women with 
$60 billion invested in productive projects of restituted families, 35% of which are the 
respo nsibility of women heads of household (Políticas Públicas Sector Agro Benefician a Más de 
506 Mil Mujeres Rurales | Finagro , n.d.) .


---
*Page 136*
---

26 
 More recently, in October 2019, the Pact for the Equity of Rural Women was signed between 
the Government, trade unions, an d organizations of rural women, as well as unions and 
companies in the agricultural production sector. This pact aims to shorten the poverty and social 
exclusion gaps of women in the Colombian countryside, giving priority to low -income women, 
and emphasizi ng the construction of specific measures aimed at accelerating equity between 
men and women in the countryside. This pact proposed five commitments to be achieved in the 
short and medium -term: 1. Economic empowerment for the elimination of gaps faced by 
women in rural areas; 2. The participation of women in scenarios of power and decision -making, 
3. Sexual and reproductive rights, 4. Rights of women to a life free of violence and, finally, 5. The 
strengthening of gender institutions for rural women. Within  the framework of this Pact, the 
Rural Development Agency has financed projects for 7,299 rural women in 31 departments of 
the country with the co -financing of Comprehensive Agricultural and Rural Development Plans, 
in projects in the areas of cocoa, potat oes, milk, beans, bananas, machinery banks, and 
agricultural inputs. At the same time, different organizations composed of rural women in 
marketing and farmer’s market have been supported. Also, technical assistance interventions 
reached 6,631 users; strat egies for the promotion, participation, and strengthening of 
associativity benefited 4,334 women in March 2020.  
The generation of income to achieve economic independence has also been a relevant axis 
within the implementation of strategies by the national government. The MADR and its affiliated 
entities have offered programs that have established affirmative measures in the prioritization 
of groups of women and associations as beneficiaries, to increase the participation of this 
population group. Among the programs, it is worth mentioning "Construyendo Cpacidades 
Empresariales Rurales (Building Rural Entrepreneurial Capacities) within the framework of El 
Campo Emprende, which benefited 17,642 women during its three calls for applications, 
representing 58.2% of the people served. Similarly, the "Generación de Ingresos y Desarrollo de 
Capacidades Productivas” (Income Generation and Development of Productive Capacities) 
project benefited 56,519 women (34.5% of the total) through strategies to ensure the 
commerci alization of agricultural products (Ministry of Agricultural and Rural Development, 
2020) . Likewise, the "Oportunidades Pacíficas Mujeres Rurales” (Peaceful Opportunities for 
Rural Women) program was launched in 2020 to strengthen organizations of female  producers 
in the Colombian Pacific, strengthen their capacities, and provide opportunities to generate 
empowerment in the context of the COVID -19 pandemic that affected the country. Aimed at 
organizations made up of 50% or more rural women, it focuses on the production or marketing 
of agricultural products for direct consumption in the departments of Cauca, Valle del Cauca, 
Chocó, and Nariño. This program is supported by the Korea International Cooperation Agency 
and the United Nations World Food Program t o provide training, inputs, and technical assistance 
to the women involved (Minagricultura Lanza Proyecto ‘Oportunidades Pacíficas Mujeres 
Rurales’ Que Fortalecerá Organizaciones de Mujeres Productoras de La Región Del Pacífico 
Colombiano , n.d.) .  
Among the financial instruments offered to improve the access of women to land and productive 
inputs, Finagro offers, through financial intermediaries (such as Banco Agrario), agricultural 
credit with special conditions, guarantees to back them, and coverage of up to 100% of the direct 
costs of the project, to finance activities that are essential to the development of a productive


---
*Page 137*
---

27 
 project, whether in the agricultural or fishing sector, as well as mining, rural tourism and 
handicraft projects. Among other things,  labor expenses, infrastructure construction, purchase 
of machinery and equipment, inputs, and purchase of livestock may be financed. Among the 
institution's financial instruments there are the Credit Line for Low -Income Rural Women and 
the Special Credit Lines (LEC for its acronym in Spanish), which offer rate subsidies. Each year, 
the National Agricultural Credit Commission defines the LECs for the respective year, among 
which an additional interest rate subsidy of between 0.5% and 1.0% E.A. is usually gr anted to 
rural women.  
Concerning efforts to increase land tenure by rural women, the National Land Agency has 
strategies for the adjudication of vacant land, formalization of rural land, formalization to 
replace illicit crops, comprehensive land subsidies,  among others. In 2019, ANT benefited more 
than 5,600 women, 47% of the total beneficiaries of the programs. During this year, ANT 
awarded 25,225 hectares to women, equivalent to 39% of the land formalized. Likewise, ANT 
allocated 51% of the subsidies to r ural women to gain access to land ownership and develop 
productive projects  (Agencia Nacional de Tierras Despliega Beneficios Para La Mujer Rural – 
Agencia Nacional de Tierras , n.d.)  . 
Additionally, the Special Administrative Unit for the Management of Restitution of Land 
Restitution (URT for its acronym in Spanish) is responsible for facilitating the restitution of land 
to the owners or possessors of land or exploiters of vacant land wh o have been victims of 
dispossession or forced abandonment of their land due to the armed conflict. The URT created 
a program of special access to women to the restitution process, to guarantee women's right to 
land during the restitution process. This int ervention was implemented so that women could 
"recognize themselves and be recognized by institutions and society as owners and workers of 
the land". The results obtained so far show 52% of the women belonging to the process as 
beneficiaries, with 35.5% of  productive projects headed by women, and the training of 16,423 
women victims, managing to reduce the gaps in access of women to land (La Restitución de 
Tierras Empodera a Las Mujeres Victimas - Banco de Éxitos - Función Pública , n.d.) . 
4.3 Legal framew ork applicable  to the CSICAP  project  
The following is a summary of the regulatory framework relevant to CSICAP  project activities.  
 
Table 0.1. Summary of the l egal gender framework specific to the CSICAP  project  
Level  Regulation  Descrip tion Interna tional First World Conference 
on Women (Mexico, 
1975).  Decade Plan for 
the Equ ality of Women  Enacts the following principles of equality between men and women, in their 
significance and value as human beings, as well as equality in their rights, 
opportunities, and responsibilities. Recognizes that the obstacles that stand in 
the way of equality of men and women must be removed.  
Recognizes the need to modernize the agricultural sector in a sustainable 
manner that generates opportunities for rural women.  
Convention on the 
Elimination of All 
Forms of 
Discriminati on against 
Women - CEDAW  "To consecrate, if they have not already done so, in their national constitutions 
and any other appropriate legislation the principle of the equality of men and 
women and to ensure by law or other appropriate means the practical 
realization of that princip le."  
It also points out the importance of the role of rural women, so often 
undervalued, encouraging the recognition that this is vital for the development 
of the countryside.


---
*Page 138*
---

28 
 Towards the Year 2000 
Strategy for the 
Advancement  of 
Women  – Nairobi 1985  Reiterates the need for the unity, inseparability, and interdependence of the 
objectives of the decade (equality and peace), about the advancement of 
women and their integration into economic, social, political, and cultural 
development. It recognizes that t he deprivation of traditional forms of 
sustenance is one of the main consequences of environmental degradation and 
particularly affects women.  
1995  Beijing  Platform 
for Action   "Combating constraints and obstacles to gender equity and advancing and 
empowering women worldwide".  
Actions under the platform include analyzing the structural linkages between 
gender, environment, and development in selected sectors such as agriculture, 
industry, fisheries, forestry, environmental health, biodiversity, clima te, water 
resources, and sanitation;  
1980 Copenhagen  
Conference : “Letter of 
the human rights of 
women ” "To promote the maintenance of the three goals of equality, development, and 
peace, with special emphasis on the sub -theme - called employment, health,  
and education - as a significant component for development."  
Resolution  66/130 - 
Resolution  66/216  Participation of rural women in public policy and participation of women in 
economic, political, and social development.  
Resolution  64/140 y  
Resolution  62/136  United Nations agreements for the improvement of the situation of women in 
rural areas.  
Belem do Pará  
Convention  The full and free exercise of the civil, political, economic, social, and cultural 
rights of women and the protection of th ose rights consecrated in regional and 
international human rights instruments are recognized. The States Parties 
recognize that violence against women impedes and nullifies the exercise of 
these rights. Ratified by Colombia through Law 248 of 1995.  
The d ecade for women  
CEPAL  It is recognized that the social and economic value of unpaid domestic work of 
women, care as a public matter that is the responsibility of states, local 
governments, organizations, businesses, and families, and the need to promote 
the shared responsibility of women and men in the family sphere.  
Sustainable 
Development Goals  Roadmap for sustainable progress that leaves no one behind, particularly 
through SDG 5. Gender equality and empowerment of girls and women.  Nactional Article 43 of the 
Political C onstitution  Whereby it is established that women and men have equal rights and 
opportunities.  
Law 51 of 1981  Whereby CEDAW is adopted and approved . 
Law 823 of 2003  It establishes regulations on equal opportunities for women, guarantees their 
rights, and incorporates gender equity actions at the national and territorial 
levels.  
Law 1232 of 2008 
(Amends Law  82 of 
1993)  Amends Law 82 of 1993, defines and dictates other provisions related to female 
head of household.  
Law 1257 of 2008  Adoption of regulations that guarantee a life free of violence for all women, 
both in the public and private spheres, and the exercise of the rights recognized 
in the legal system.  
Law 581 of 2000  "By which the adequate and effective participation of women in the decision -
making levels of the different branches and organs o f public power is 
regulated".  
Law 1413 of 2010 o r 
Economy o f Care Law  Includes the care economy made up of unpaid household work in the National 
Accounts System, to measure the contribution of women to the economic and 
social development of the country and as a fundamental tool for the definition 
and implementation of public policies.  
CONPES 161 of 2013  National Public Policy on Gender Equity, whose main objective is to contribute 
to guarantee the full enjoyment of the rights of Colombian women by applying 
the principles of equality and non -discrimination.  
Law 1955 of 2019  Whereby the National Development Plan 2018 -2022 is adopted. Which 
includes the Pact for Women's Equity and the gender budget tracer.  
Law 731 of 2002 o r 
Rural W omen Law  Its purpose is to improve the quality of life of rural women, giving priority to 
low-income women, and establish specific measures aimed at accelerating 
equity between rural men and women.  
 
Article 28 orders the participation of rural women in reforestation plans, 
programs, and projects. At least 30% of the labor force must be rural women 
living in the areas. They must be consulted together with the community to 
which they belong.


---
*Page 139*
---

29 
 Decr ee 2365 of 2015  Creation of  the Direction for Rural Women in the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Development.  
Law 1900 of 2018  Whereby gender equity criteria are established in the awarding of vacant lands, 
rural housing, productive projects, and other provisions (amending Law 160 of 
1994).  
Resolu tion 464 of 2017 
– Guidelines for F amily, 
Peasant and 
Community  
Agriculture (Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural 
Development)  Adopting the Strategic Public Policy Guidelines for Peasant, Family and 
Community Agriculture. These recognize the fundamental role of rural women 
and the importance of the gender approach in the formulation of ACFC (for its 
acronym in Spanish) policy.  
Resolu tion 311 of 2019 
– 
(Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural 
Development ) Whereby the paragraph of Article 5 of Law 1900 of 2018 is regulated and 
marginality criteria for rural women are established.  
Agreement  058 of 2018 
– National Land A gency  It regulates the administration and granting of rights of use to vacant land that 
can be awarde d and grants additional points to vulnerable populations such as 
rural women and mothers who carry out activities aimed at food production, 
environmental protection, and the substitution of illicit crops.  
Resolu tion 12096 of 
2019 – National Land 
Agency  Modifies Article 45 of Resolution 740 of 2017 and creates a prioritization route 
for rural women through the recognition of the care economy as a productive 
activity of exploitation of the property, additional points for mothers who are 
heads of household a nd those who are organized in women's associations.  
 Law 1876 of 2017  "Through which the National Agricultural Innovation System (SNIA for its 
acronym in Spanish) is created and other provisions are issued...", through this 
Law the SNIA is created, where it is urged to adopt alternatives that guarantee 
the real participation of rural women and young people. The approaches of 
Agricultural Extension in the provision of the service include the promotion of 
the development of organizations of wo men. Also, a rural woman 
representative is assigned a seat on the Superior Council of the SNIA.  
Agreement  004 of 2020 
– Rural Developme nt 
Agency  It establishes that rural women, ethnic groups, young people, victims, and 
people in the process of reincorpo ration are part of the five population groups 
subject to different attention of the Integral Rural Development Projects -
PIDAR. For this purpose, 50% of the organization must be made up of women.   
 
4.4 Institutional capacities at the n ational and local levels  
Compliance with the norms and implementation of the policies and programs indicated in the 
previous sections is mainly the responsibility of the entities of the Agricultural, Fishing and Rural 
Development Sector, which is made up of the Minist ry of Agriculture and Rural Development 
and its many affiliated and related entities, which participate in different stages of the 
construction, implementation, and monitoring of public policy. The mainstreaming of the 
gender perspective implies the consta nt articulation of different agencies in each of the entities. 
Precisely, the responsibility for leading this articulation lies with the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Development through the Rural Women's Directorate – DMR (for its acronym in Spanish).  
A technical directorate created in the Vice -Ministry of Rural Development in 2015 and its guiding 
axis is the implementation of Law 731 of 2002 (Law of Rural Women) in the areas of competence 
of the sector.


---
*Page 140*
---

30 
 The main function of the DMR is the coordination , design, and evaluation of policy plans and 
projects aimed at influencing the social and economic well -being of rural women, as well as 
promoting coordination with national and territorial entities for the implementation of such 
plans and projects. At the  national level, the main interlocutors of the DMR are the High 
Counselor's Office for Gender Equity, the agencies of the National Planning Department related 
to rural development and gender equity, and the entities attached to and linked to the Ministry. 
At the territorial level, the main interlocutors are the territorial governments (departments and 
municipalities) through the female secretaries of the women and rural development secretaries, 
or whoever acts as the liaison for gender issues in the territo ry. 
The articulated work between national entities allows, among other things, the follow -up of the 
gender indicators of the sector in the National Development Plan and the Implementation 
Framework Plan. The monitoring and follow -up of these indicators mak e it possible to provide 
feedback within the sector on the actions taken in gender equity. Likewise, the articulation 
between the entities allows the formulation of joint strategies for the productive inclusion of 
rural women along the value chain of the a gricultural and rural development sectors. This value 
chain ranges from access, restitution, and formalization of land to marketing strategies and the 
generation of added economic value.  
In the area of access and formalization of land ownership, the Nation al Land Agency (ANT for its 
acronym in Spanish), through the gender team in the General Directorate, has managed to 
incorporate affirmative measures in the access and formalization programs, in addition to 
formulating a priority attention route for rural w omen. Although the gender group of the 
General Directorate cannot be responsible for the implementation of the entire land policy for 
rural women, it has ensured the mainstreaming of the gender approach within the agency 
through guidelines and technical su pport to the different departments of the entity. For its part, 
the Land Restitution Unit (URT for its acronym in Spanish) has a Social Directorate, which is 
responsible for incorporating the gender approach into the land restitution policy. The Social 
Directorate has a team of experts in gender and land restitution, who are under the 
responsibility of formulating and designing methodologies that promote the participation of 
rural women in the land restitution process.  
The Rural Development Agency (ADR for its acronym in Spanish), responsible for implementing 
agricultural policy and productive inclusion, has incorporated strategies for the participation of 
rural women in the different services it offers. Within the ADR, the Participation and 
Associativity Di rectorate of the Projects Vice Presidency is the unit that leads the gender issue; 
however, there are gender liaisons in the national directorates and territorial offices under the 
responsibility of the Productive Integration Vice Presidency, through which  the agency 
implements its services. All these liaisons coordinate internally and with the Directorate of Rural 
Women, unions, territorial entities, and other entities to promote the participation of rural 
women in agricultural production.  
It should be recalled that the ANT and the ADR are the main executors of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and agricultural policy of Rural Development, for which they have offices in the 
territory. However, the ANT only has eight Territorial Management Units, a nd the ADR has 
thirteen Territorial Technical Units, which reflects their weak territorial presence in the 32


---
*Page 141*
---

31 
 departments of the country. In addition, the gender liaisons in these offices are usually in charge 
of multiple issues and responsibilities, which  limits the capacity of the agencies to address 
gender issues in practice.  
FINAGRO and the Agrario Bank do not have units exclusively dedicated to gender 
mainstreaming, but multiple units are working to create affirmative measures to promote the 
financial inclusion of rural women. In the case of FINAGRO, the presidential advisory team has 
designated a person in charge of issues of rural women, who is responsible for coordinating 
actions with the areas of FINAGRO and the different actors of the National Agri cultural Credit 
Commission. Agrario Bank also has people in charge of issues of rural women in the small 
producer and microfinance areas. It is important to mention that Agrario Bank is the financial 
institution with the largest territorial presence, cover ing 1,036 (94%) of the country's 
municipalities through offices and banking correspondents.  
Finally, the Rural Agricultural and Livestock Planning Unit – UPRA (for its acronym in Spanish), 
the entity responsible for planning the agricultural and rural sect or, is building the 
Comprehensive Agricultural Risk Management System, an initiative to centralize information 
that seeks to anticipate potential risks in the sector in different areas, one of which is the well -
being of producers. To this end, UPRA has a t eam of professionals with experience and expertise 
in gender issues who are identifying gender risks in several prioritized production chains.  
Finally, at the national level, the role of the Rural Development Directorate and the Gender Sub 
directorate of t he National Planning Department in providing technical support to the Ministry 
and its affiliated and related entities is highlighted, especially for the development of plans and 
policies that have an impact on the well -being of rural women and improve the ir productive 
participation in the sector.  
As mentioned above, the entities responsible for implementing the national policy in the 
territory are the Secretariats of Women and the Secretariats of Agriculture, whose specific 
functions rely on the institutio nal arrangement of each department and municipality. In the case 
of the Secretariats of Women, their efforts are generally oriented towards the formulation and 
direction of programs that have an impact on improving the welfare of women in different fields 
of social, political, and economic life. In contrast, the Agricultural Secretariats are focused on 
territorial productive development. There are some specific cases, such as that of the Secretariat 
of Women of the Government of Cundinamarca, which has a un it specializing in issues of rural 
women. In addition to Cundinamarca, the following departments where the CSICAP  project will 
be implemented also have Secretariats of Women: Antioquia, Arauca, Cauca, Córdoba, Huila, 
Meta, Nariño, Norte de Santander, Sucre,  Tolima and Valle del Cauca. In other words, 12 (55%) 
of 22 departments could count on these secretariats as strategic allies for the implementation 
of the CSICAP  project.   
It is important to point out the role of the Secretariats of Agriculture in the imp lementation of 
income generation programs of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development such as 
Support for Productive Alliances or El Campo Emprende, in which the Secretariats of Agriculture 
are responsible for promoting the call for proposals at t he territorial level and disseminating 
affirmative measures in favor of rural women. In turn, it is the Secretariats of Agriculture that


---
*Page 142*
---

32 
 coordinate with the regional offices of the National Land Agency and the Rural Development 
Agency for the development o f local activities such as business fairs, markets of farmers, and 
business rounds.


---
*Page 143*
---

33 
 5. Bibliographical References  
 
Alliance Biodiversity CIAT. (27 of 01 of 2021). Biodiversityinternational.org Programa de 
Investigación en Cambio Climático, Agricultura y Seguridad Alimentaria del CGIAR.  
Obtained from  Bananos y cambio climático: que va a pasar con una de las frutas 
preferidas en el mundo?: 
https://www.bioversityinternational.org/news/detail/bananos -y-cambio -climatico -
que-va-a-pasar -con-una-de-las-frutas -preferidas -en-el-mundo/  
Barbosa, E. O. (2011). Tesis Evaluación del desarrollo del cultivo de papa bajo escenarios de 
variabilidad climática interanual y cambio climático, en el sur oeste de la Sabana de 
Bogotá.  Bogotá: Universidad Na cional.  
Beuchelt, T. D., & Badstue, L. (2013). Gender, Nutrition, and Climate -Smart Food Production: 
Opportunities and Trade -offs. Food Security 5: , 709 –21. 
Bocanegra, H. (2019). Asobancaria Riesgos ambientales y sociales en la producción de panela. 
Pilot os de innovación financiera del sector agropecuario.  Bogotá.  
Calderón, M. C. (2016). Tesis: Impactos de la variabilidad y el cambio climático sobre el cultivo 
del banano (Musa spp) en tres países productores de América Latina.  Cali: Univesidad 
Autónoma de Occidente.  
Cenicaña. (10 of 01 of 2021). Cenicana.org . Obtained from  Clima ¿Que tanto afecta la 
productividad?: https://www.cenicana.org/clima -que-tanto -afecta -la-productividad/  
Cervantes, R. A., Angulo, G. V., Tavizón, E. F., & González, J. R. (2014). 61. Impactos potenciales 
del cambio climático en la producción de maíz. Investigación y ciencia de la 
Universidad Autónoma de Aguas Calientes , 48-53. 
Conpes Social 150. (2012). Meto dologías oficiales y arreglos institucionales para la medición de 
la pobreza en Colombia.  Bogotá D.C.: National Planning Department . 
Cortéz, C. A. (2013). Uso del modelo aquacrop para estimar rendimientos para el cultivo de 
papa en los departamentos de Cun dinamarca y Boyacá.  Colombia: FAO.  
CTA; GSI -LAC; COSUDE; IDEAM. (2015). Evaluación multisectorial de la huella hídrica en 
Colombia. Resultados por subzonas hidrográficas en el marco del Estudio Nacional del 
Agua 2014.  Medellín: Sello Editorial CTA.  
CTA; GS I-LAC; COSUDE; IDEAM. (2015). Evaluación Multisectorial de la Huella Hídrica en 
Colombia. Resultados por subzonas hidrográficas en el marco del Estudio Nacional del 
Agua 2014.  Medellín, Colombia: SELLO EDITORIAL CTA.  
DANE. (2016). III Censo Nacional Agrope cuario.  Bogotá D.C.  
DANE. (2019). Gran Encuesta Integrada de Hogares 2018.  Bogotá D.C.  
DANE. (2020a). Retroproyecciones y proyecciones de población a nivel nacional, departamental 
y municipal.  Bogotá D.C.  
DANE. (2020b). Censo Nacional de Población y Vivien da 2018.  Bogotá D.C.


---
*Page 144*
---

34 
 DANE. (2020c). Encuesta Nacional de Calidad de Vida 2019.  Bogotá D.C.  
DANE. (2020d). Encuesta Nacional Agropecuaria 2019 - II Semestre.  Bogotá D.C.  
Elbehri, A. G. (2015). Cambio climático y sostenibilidad del banano en el Ecuador: Evaluación de 
impacto y directrices de política.  Rom e: Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).  
F. Castro -Llanos, G. H. -V. (2019). Climate change favors rice production at higher elevations in 
Colombia. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Glo bal Change. 24 , 1401 –1430.  
FAO. (27 de 01 de 2021). FAO. . Obtained from  Diversidad del ganado y cambio climático: 
http://www.fao.org/3/i0112s/i0112s16.pdf  
FAO y PNUD. (2020). Análisis de vulnerabilidad y riesgo por cambio climático en el sector 
agropecuar io en Colombia.  Bogotá: Programa de integración de la agricultura en los 
Planes Nacionales de Adaptación PNA -Ag. 
FONADE e IDEAM. (2013). Efectos del cambio climático en la producción y rendimiento de 
cultivos por sectores. Evaluación del riesgo agroclimáti co por sectores.  Bogotá.  
Guerra, A., & Hernández, A. (27 de 01 de 2021). Centro Guatemalteco de Investigación y 
Capacitación de la Caña. . Obt ained from  El cambio climático y el cultivo de la caña de 
azúcar: https://icc.org.gt/wp -content/uploads/2017/06/cu ltivo -de-ca%C3%B1a -de-
azucar -en-guatemala -492-525.pdf  
IAvHumboldt. (2012). Actualización del Atlas de Páramos de Colombia a escala 1:100.000.  
Bogotá D.C.  
IAvHumboldt. (2012). Geoservicios de la delimitación de páramos a escala y humedales, en 
convenio realizado con el Fondo Adaptación (shapefile).  Bogotá.  
IAvHumboldt. (2014). Bosque Seco Tropical, escala 1:100.000 (shapefile).  Bogotá.  
IAvHumboldt. (2014). El bosque seco tropical en Colombia. Escala 1:100.000.  Bogotá D.C.  
IAvHumboldt. (2015). Criiterios para la delimitación de humedales en Colombia. Colombia 
anfibia un país de humedales (Vol 1).  Bogotá D.C.  
IAvHumboldt. (2015). Mapa Identificación de humedales de Colombia, escala 1:100.000 
(shapefile).  Bogotá.  
IDEAM. (2010). Mapa de flujos torrenciales a escala 1:500.000.   
IDEAM. (2019). Colombia. Superficie deforestada (ha). Reporte por Municipio. Periodo 2014 -
2018.  Bogotá D.C.: Ecosystems and Environmental Information Subdirectorate . Forest 
and Carbon Monitoring System.  
IDEAM. (2019). Estudio Nacional del Agua 2018.  Bogotá: IDEAM.  
IDEAM. (2020). Resultados de monitoreo de deforestación 2019.  Bogotá.  
IDEAM, PNUD, MADS, DNP & CANCILLERÍA. (2016). Inventario nacional y departamental de 
Gases Efecto Invernadero - Colombia. Tercera Comunicac ión Nacional de Cambio 
Climático.  Bogotá D.C.: IDEAM, PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA, FMAM.


---
*Page 145*
---

35 
 IDEAM, PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA. (2015). Primer Informe Bienal de Actualización de 
Colombia ante la CMNUCC.  Bogotá D.C.  
IDEAM, PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA. (2017 ). Análisis de vulnerabilidad y riesgo por 
cambio climático en Colombia.  Bofotá D.C.: Third National Communication on Climate 
Change . 
IDEAM, PNUD, MADS, DNP, CANCILLERÍA. (2017). Análisis de vulnerabilidad y riesgo por 
cambio climático en Colombia. Tercera  Comunicación Nacional de Cambio Climático.  
Bogotá.  
IGAC. (2012). Estudio de los conflictos de uso del territorio colombiano. Escala 1.100.000.  
Bogotá D.C.  
IGAC. (2012). Estudio de los conflictos de uso del territorio colombiano. Escala 1:100.000.  
Bogotá D .C. 
IGAC -IDEAM. (2012; 2016). Mapa de inundaciones a escala 1:100.000.   
Isaza, C., & Cornejo, J. (2014). Cambio climático y su impacto en el cultivo del café.  Solidaridad 
Norad.  
MADS & IDEAM . (2019). Resultados de monitoreo de deforestación 2019.  Bogotá D .C. 
Meadu, V. (26 de 01 de 2021). Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food 
Security . Obtained from  ¿El maíz esta perdiendo la carrera contra el cambio climático?: 
https://ccafs.cgiar.org/es/news/el -maiz -esta -perdiendo -la-carrera -contra -el-cambio -
climatico  
MINAGRICULTURA. (1 de 11 de 2020). Clima y Sector Agropecuario Colombiano . Obtained from  
http://ww w.aclimatecolombia.org/huella -hidrica/  
Ministerio de Ambiente y Desarrollo Sostenible. (11 de 10 de 2020). Acuerdos Cero 
Deforestación . Obtained from  https://www.minambiente.gov.co/index.php/acuerdos -
cero -deforestacion  
Ministerio de Ambiente y Desarrollo S ostenible. (28 de 01 de 2021). Ministerio de Ambiente y 
Desarrollo Sostenible. Reservas forestales de Ley segunda.  Obtained from  
https://www.minambiente.gov.co/images/BosquesBiodiversidadyServiciosEcosistemic
os/pdf/reservas_forestales/reservas_forestales_l ey_2da_1959.pdf  
Parques Nacionales Naturales de Colombia. (2020). Registro Único de Áreas Protegidas.  Bogotá 
D.C. 
Parques Nacionales Naturales de Colombia. (2020). Registro Único de Áreas Protegidas.  Bogotá 
D.C. 
Parques Nacionales Naturales de Colombia. (31 de 01 de 2021). Parques Nacionales Naturales 
de Colombia. Sistema Nacional de áreas protegidas SINAP.  Obtained from  
https://www.parquesnacionales.gov.co/portal/es/sistema -nacional -de-areas -
protegidas -sinap/  
SGC. (2015). Mapa Nacional de susceptibilidad a movimientos en masa a escala 1:100.000


---
*Page 146*
---

36 
  
 
 
1.  
2.  
3.


---
*Page 147*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Social, Gender and Environmental study of the Project CSICAP * in Colombia  
Gender Action Plan  
presented to:  
The Alliance of Bioversity International and CIAT  Date: 03/31/2021  
Rev. 19/11/2021  
Deliverable No. 4  
GENDER ACTION PLAN  
CSICAP  Climate -smart initiatives for climate change adaptation and 
sustainabili ty in prioritized agricultural production systems in Colombia 
(CSICAP) * 
Annex 8 – Part B  
Green Climate F und Funding Proposal  
* The initial tittle of the project was changed from Low -Emission and Climate Resilient 
Agriculture in Colombia ( LECRA ) to Climate -smart initiatives for climate change adaptation 
and sustainability in prioritized agricultural production systems in Colombia (CSICAP).  All 
the references in this document have been changed to CSICAP.  If there is any reference to 
LECRA  should be understand as CSICAP


---
*Page 148*
---

Overal l Objective : Help to close the gender gap  in prioritized agricultural value  chains and promote equitable access to the strategies, plans, programs, services, goods,  and activities of the Project  
Activi ties Indica tors Baseline  Target  M&E 
Timing Respons ible 
entities  Budget  
estimates  
(USD )  
Specific Objective  related to CSICAP ´s first component : Reduce barriers to access to agroclimatic information faced by rural women   
Gender outcomes  related to CSICAP ´s first component   
Men and women p roducers have equal access to information on 
seasonal climat e forecast s in agriculture , as well as recommendations 
associated to the crops  product ion cycle  Percentage of  agricultural holdings 
(farms) with female producers making 
decisions , with ICT connectivity and 
access  70.5% 71.1% 
During and 
after 
operation  Producer 
Associations , 
CIAT, Gender Team , 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  $275,014   
Percentage of  agricultural holdings 
(farms) with female producers making 
decisions , that u tilize ICT to access  
climate forecast information  24.9% 28.0%  
Percentage of  agricultural holdings 
(farms) with female producers making 
decisions , that introduced changes 
related to climate monitoring  1.4% 3.6%  
Gender outputs  related to CSICAP ´s first component   
1.1 Comprehensive information dissemination strategy designed and 
implemented on agricultural practices for agroclimatic risk management, 
considering ethnic and gender differences, using different communication 
channels  Comprehensive information 
dissemination strategy on agricultural 
practices for agroclimatic risk 
management, considering ethnic and 
gender differences, using different 
communication channels, designed and 
implemented  0 1 
Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations , 
CIAT, Gender Team , 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  $133,778   
Number of  agricultural holdings (farms) 
with female producers making 
decisions , that received technical 
assistance on agroclimatic risks  0 13,000  
Percentage of  agricultural holdings 
(farms) with female producers making 
decisions , that received technical 
assistance on agroclimatic risks  30.1% 38.9%  
Number of  agricultural holdings (farms)  
that implemented best agricultural 
adaptation practices to climate change  3,171 16,171  
Percentage of  agricultural holdings 
(farms) with female producers making 
decisions , that implemented best 
agricultural adaptation practices to 
climate change  0.52%  2.7%  
1.2. Strategy designed and implemented on women producers and rural 
women ´s empowerment and their participation in decision -making 
position s. This strategy can be developed with the support of the Rural 
Women's Unit of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development and Strategy on women producers and rural 
wome n´s empowerment and their 
participation in decision -making 
positions, designed and implemented  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations  
CIAT, Gender Team , 
Ministry of $141,236


---
*Page 149*
---

 
3 
 the Presidential Council for Women's Equity, which already have training 
programs.  Number of  women trained in women 
producers and rural women 
empowerment and their participation 
in decision -making positions  0 12,750 Agriculture  (Rural  
Women 
Directorate )  
Percentage of  agricultural holdings 
(farms)  with female producers making 
decisions  33.3% 36.2%  
Gender activities related to CSICAP ´s first component   
1.1.1 Design and implement plan for disseminating information on 
agroclimatic risk management  that includes a language  analysis 
differentiated by region , considering ethnic elements -if necessary -, 
transmission schedules (taking into account variables of the care economy 
and sexual division of labor). The  analysis shall present the scope of the 
plan  in terms of number of people disaggregated  by gender, age, ethnicity.  
These plans will be supported by consultations with women and women's 
organizations contacted with the support of the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Development.  Plan for disseminating information on 
agroclimatic risk managem ent that 
includes a language analysis 
differentiated by region, considering 
ethnic elements -if necessary -, 
transmission schedules (taking into 
account variables of the care economy 
and sexual division of labor , since the 
call), designed and implemented  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations  
CIAT, Gender Team , 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  (Rural 
Women 
Directorate, 
Agricultural 
Innovation 
Directorate ) $0  
1.1.2 Within the plan for disseminating information on agroclimatic risk 
management, define and implement actions through different 
communication channels, with the support of the local platforms of Vive 
Digital (National Plan to develop a digital ecosystem in t he country) and 
other platforms of information dissemination (community radio stations, 
booklets with  audio instructions).  Dissemination actions on agroclimatic 
risk management defined and 
implemented  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation   CIAT, Gender Team , 
Producer 
Associations  $0  
1.1.3. Elaborate in a participatory way a document that articulat es into 
project activities the  local knowledge and practices of men and women 
related to the management of agroclimatic risk, both in the crop and in 
other aspects, such as the home, the agroecological calendar, irrigation 
strategies and practices and tools to manage  drought. This info rmation will 
also be disseminated within action 1.1.1 of component 1.  Document that articulates into project 
activities the local knowledge and 
practices of men and women related to 
the management of agroclimatic risk 
elabora ted 0 9 During 
operation  Producer 
Associations  
CIAT, Gender Team , 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  $36,000   
1.1.4. Design and implement actions to train men and women producers in 
Information Literacy with an ethnic , age  and gender focus   Actions to train men and women 
producers in Information Literacy with 
an ethnic , age  and gender focus 
designed and implemented  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations  
CIAT, Gender Team  $35,903  
1.1.5 Design and implement a plan to cofinanc e electronic communication 
devices (smartphones) for (direct and indirect) women beneficiaries of the 
program.  
Women have lower levels of access to ICT, not only  due to knowledge 
gaps, but  also to access to resources. The co -financing plan includes an 
elect ronic device financing strategy for women to ensure access to 
program information.  Plan to cofinance  electronic 
communication devices (smartphones) 
for (direct and indirect) women 
beneficiaries of the program, designed 
and implemented  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team  $61,875


---
*Page 150*
---

 
4 
 1.2.1 Design and implement a training and socialization plan on women's 
empowerment issues. The plan addresses at least the following topics:  
- Leadership, gender,  and inequality  
- Gender -based violence  
- Local, regional,  and national decision -making bodies  and positions  
- Assertive communication  
- Associativity  
- Process of  formaliz ing organizations , associations,  or businesses  
Special emphasis will be placed on the participation of women in instances 
such as the Agroclimatic Technical Tables  
(Women -only  activitie s) Training and socialization plan on 
women's empowerment issues 
designed and implemented  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team  $133,681   
1.2.2. In addition, design a nd implement a plan to promote the 
participation of women in local and regional decision -making bodies of the 
agricultural sector , that li aise with  local and regional authorities ( mayor’s 
offices , governorates). The plan includes activities to disseminate 
information on calls for applications  to decision -making positions , work 
sessions with local authorities.  
Special emphasis will be placed on the p articipation of women in instances 
such as the Agroclimatic Technical Tables .  
(Women -only activities)  
It will be linked to the Rural Women Directorate of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Development so that through its Rural Women 
Information System (FOMUR) the registration of participating women is 
promoted and in this way, there is better communicat ion about the plans, 
programs, and projects at the national level.   Plan to promote the participation of 
women in local and regional decision -
making bodies of the agricultural 
sector , designed and implemented  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team , 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  (Rural 
Women 
Directorate ) $3,333   
1.2.3 Include and implement a module within the training plan and 
participation  plan for young rural women that includes the following 
elements:  
- Dissemination of information on decision -making  bodies  or positions  
exclusive for the rural youth ( including, among others, the Municipal Youth 
Councils)  
- Training on the Statute of Youth  Participation  
- Dissemination and training on institutional programs  for young people . 
This, with the support of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development and its consolidated offer for young people.  Training and participation module f or 
young rural women , included and 
implemented  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team , 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  (Rural 
Women 
Directorate ) $4,222   
Specific Objective related to CSICAP ´s second component : Strengthen the capacities of rural women for sustainable, climate -resilient agriculture that guarantees food security for them and their household s   
Gender outcomes related to CSICAP ´s second component   
Men and women producers have equitable access to information to take 
advantage of and implement technologies and practices for the adop tion 
of sustainable production systems that promote resilience to climate 
variability, efficient use of water and low -carbon agricultur e Percentage of  agricultural holdings 
(farms)  with female producers making 
decisions , that adopt ed good 
agricultural  practices  due to the 
extension service  1.0% 1.4% 
During and 
after 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team , 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  $460,333   
Percentage of  agricultural holdings 
(farms) with female producers making 
decisions , that improved the 
management of ecosystem services 
and biodiversity conservation due to 
the extension service  0.2% 0.3%


---
*Page 151*
---

 
5 
 Percentage of  agricultural holdings 
(farms) with female producers making 
decisions , that introduced changes or 
improvement in the selection of seeds 
or genetic material  0.5% 0.6%  
Percentage of  agricultural holdings 
(farms) , with female producers making 
decisions , that implemented soil 
management practices  59.4% 60.6%  
Percentage of  agricultural holdings 
(farms)  with female producers making 
decisions , that implemented pest 
control practices  62.6% 62.7%  
Gender outputs related to CSICAP ´s second component   
2.1. Strategy designed and implemented for the productive inclusion of 
(direct and indirect) women beneficiaries based on new opportunities of 
sustainable production practices throughout  the value chain links.  Strategy for the productive inclusion of 
(direct and indirect) women 
beneficiaries designed and 
implemented  0 1 
Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team , 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  $460,333   
Number of  women receiving 
agricultural extension service   0 2,310  
Percentage of  female -headed rural 
households that are not monetary poor  66.2% 67.7%  
Gender activities related to CSICAP ´s second component   
2.1.1 Engage  women beneficiaries as leaders in the process of 
implementing CSICAP ´s plans and activities for the conservation, 
preservation and restoration of strategic areas and ecosystems.  
The banana sector has expressed interest in signing agreements on the 
conservation of natural resources . Similarly, the sugar cane sector will 
support the conservation of hydrographic basins.  Women -led p lans for the conservation, 
preservation and restorati on of 
strategic areas and ecosystems , 
designed and implemented  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team  $0  
2.1.2 Design and implement a plan for the recovery and/or promotion of 
quality native seeds and species with commercial gains , managed by rural 
women (direct and indirect beneficiaries). This plan will be linked to the 
project´s activities  developing climate -resilient varieties, especially for the 
potato, corn, rice and sugar cane crops , as well as the National Seed Plan 
led by Agrosavia . Women -led p lan for the recovery 
and/or promotion of quality native 
seeds and species with commercial 
gains, designed  and implemented  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team,  
Ministry of 
Agriculture  $90,611


---
*Page 152*
---

 
6 
 2.1.3. Design and implement a training and support plan for the 
production and commercialization of organic fertilizers and bioproducts 
for the management of pests and diseases, led by women farmer s´ groups 
and/or organizations (direct and indirect beneficiaries of the project ). 
The training module, to be carried out with  all the crops/ chains involved in 
the project, includes at least  the following topics : 
- Agricultural  production, marketing and distribution  
- Associativity (It is articulated with action 1.2.1 of component 1 and with 
Action 3.2.2 of component 3 of this action plan).  
- Phytosanitary risks  
- Consequences of the use of agrochemicals.  
- Design  of business plans  
- Financial literacy  
Additionally, co -financing of the projects will be sought.  Training and support plan for the 
production and commercialization of 
organic fertilizers and bioproducts for 
the management of pests and diseases, 
led by women farmers ´ groups and/or 
organizations , designed and 
implemented  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team,  
Ministry of 
Agriculture  $225,000   
2.1.4.  Design  and implement a training and dissemination module for 
young rural women on primary  processing , management, marketing, 
among other  topics.  Training and dissemination module for 
young rural women on primary 
processing, management, marketing, 
designed and implemented  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team,  
Ministry of 
Agriculture  $47,500  
2.1.5. Design and implement a training plan exclusively for women on 
issues of climate resilient agriculture  that focus es on the tasks performed 
by women  within each crop/ chain, such as: seed selection, diversification 
of crops, subsistence farming, pre and post -harvest . 
Given that women in the banana, potato and panela cane sectors  are 
especially excluded from productive activities, this plan will be specially 
formulated f or them (direct and indirect women beneficiaries).  
(Women -only training plan).  Training plan exclusively for women on 
issues of climate resilient agriculture 
that focuses on the tasks performed by 
women within each crop/chain, 
designed and implemented  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation  CIAT, Gender Team,  
Producer 
Associations  $97,222   
Specific Objective related to CSICAP ´s third component : Reduce structural barriers that hinder the entry and full participation of rural women in agricultural value chains   
Gender outcomes related to CSICAP ´s third component   
The agricultural innovation processes respond to the ethnic, regional, age 
and gender characteristics of the producers engaged in  the project , in 
order to guarantee an equal participation.  Percentage of  agricultural holdings 
(farms)  with female producers making 
decisions  33.30%  36.9% 
During and 
after 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT ( Gender 
Team ), 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  $845,967   
Percentage of  female -headed rural 
households  29.5% 34.8%  
Average time spent by rural women in 
unpaid care work  7:52  7:20   
Rural f emale employment rate  37.5% 38.4%  
Percentage of  agricultural holdings 
(farms) with female producers making 
decisions , with  access to credit or 
funding  17.9% 18.0%  
Percentage of  agricultural holdings 
(farms) with female producers making 
decisions , participating  in farmers´ 
groups o r organizations  20.7% 22.5%


---
*Page 153*
---

 
7 
 Percentage of  agricultural holdings 
(farms) with female producers making 
decisions , with access to agricultural 
extension service   30.10%  50.4%  
Percentage of  women on the Board of 
Directors of the Producer Associations  FNC: 0%; 
Fedepanela: 7%; 
Fedearroz: 5%; 
Fedepapa: 5%; 
Fenalce: 6%; 
Fedegan: 9%; 
Asbama:11%; 
Asocaña: 0%  30%   
Gender outputs related to CSICAP ´s third component   
3.1. Strategy designed and implemented for training in gender equality  
and gender  mainstreaming  within the technical assistance process 
developed by the project . This strategy can be developed with the support 
of the Directorate for Rural Women of the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Development and the Presidential Council for Equity for Women.  Strategy for training in gender equality 
and gender mainstreaming within the 
technical assistance process developed 
by the project, designed and 
implemented   0 1 
Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team , 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  $281,133   
Number of  men and women produc ers 
trained in gender equality and gender 
mainstreaming  0 16,000  
Number  of extensi on workers trained 
in gender equality , gender 
mainstreaming  and gender -based 
violence . 0 200  
Number of  women trained and 
certified as agricultural extension 
workers  0 100  
3.2. Strategy designed and implemented for the creation of community 
networks for knowledge management and sharing, by engaging women´s 
groups and associations  as agents of knowledge transmission, 
construction,  and adoptio n.  Strategy for the creation of community 
networks for knowledge management 
and sharing, by engaging women´s 
groups and associations as agents of 
knowledge transmission, construction 
and adoption , designed and 
implemented  0 1 
Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team,  
Ministry of 
Agriculture  $107,333   
Number of  agricultural holdings (farms)  
with female producers making 
decisions , participating in farmers´ 
groups or organizations  0 540  
Percentage of  agricultural holdings 
(farms)  with female producers making 
decisions , participating in farmers´ 
groups or organizations  20.7%  22.5%  
3.3 Strategy designed and implemented to liaise  with government  officials 
and engage women beneficiaries into public programs  aimed to improve 
women's access to factors  of production . This strategy can be developed 
with the support of the Directorate for Rural  Women of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Development . Strategy to liaise with government 
officials and engage women 
beneficiaries into public programs 
aimed to improve women's access to 
factors of production, designed and 
implemented  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation   Gender Team , 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  $10,000


---
*Page 154*
---

 
8 
 Number of  women beneficiaries 
engaged into public programs aimed to 
improve women's access to factors of 
production  0 1,500  
3.4 Pilot projects systematized and implemented to approach the care 
economy at the local level for (direct and indirect ) women beneficiaries.    Number of  pilot projects providing local 
care services designed and 
implemented  0 9 
Pre 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team , 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  $297,5 00  
Number of  women beneficiaries with 
care services  0 450  
Number of  male and female children, 
seniors , and people with disabilities 
receiving care services  0 180  
3.5 Plans designed  and implemented for mainstreaming gender in 
Producers Associations ´ policies and practices  Number of  plans for mainstreaming 
gender in Producers Associations´ 
policies and practices designed and 
implemented  0 9 Pre and 
during 
operation   Gender Team , 
Producer 
Associations  $150,000   
Number of  Producer Associations  that 
main streamed gender into their 
policies and practices  0 9  
Gender activities related to CSICAP ´s third component   
3.1.1 Develop and deliver training modules with men and women 
producers participating in the project on gender equality and gender 
mainstreaming  that include , at least, the following topics:  
- The care  economy  
- Sexual division of labor  
- Gender violence (Hotlines, public  services, among others)  
- Women rights  
- Masculinities  
- Economic and financial literacy  (household and farm financ ial 
management . It should include awareness about the recognition and 
payment of activities carried out b y women: preparing food for day 
laborers, among others).  
-A specific module  for young rural women about sexual and reproductive 
rights .  
This strategy will be supported by the workshops already being developed 
by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development on rights, gender, 
and the care economy for rural producers, and the economic and financial 
education workshops "My finances count" for rural women and youth.  Training modules with men and women 
producers participating in the project 
on gender equality and gender 
mainstreaming, developed and 
delivered  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations  
CIAT, Gender Team , 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  (Rural 
Women 
Directorate ) $133,333   
3.1.2. Develop and deliver a training module for women producers 
(women -only activities), using various methodologies (e.g. female farmer -
to-female farmer extension ), for the implementation of new technologies 
provided by the Project  Training module for women producers 
(women -only activities) for the 
implementation of new technologies 
provided by the Project, developed and 
delivered  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation   Gender Team , 
Producer 
Associations  $20,833


---
*Page 155*
---

 
9 
 3.1.3. Design and implement a  gender -sensitive  plan  specifying the 
strategy for the inclusion of women in training activities and women´s 
access to technology -which will be  part of the project's agricultural 
extension strategy -. The plan includes:  
- Consensus regarding the schedule of activities (considering care work ). 
- Adequate and pertinent communication methods for the elderly 
population.  
- Follow -up actions on women´s assistance to project activities to ensure 
that the ir training process is completed  
- Provision of c are services for  children (those who take care of them 
during project activities  must receive payment for th is work ) Gender -sensitive plan specifying the 
strategy for the inclusion of women in 
training activities and women´s access 
to technology, designed and 
implemented  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team , 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  (Rural 
Women 
Directorate ) $36,1 33  
3.1.4. Design and implement a gender awareness training plan with 
agricultural extension workers for the  subsequent  implementation of the 
gender equ ality training module with producers (Action 3.1.1 Component 
3). This plan will include awareness -raising on Gender -Based Violence and 
will be supported by the workshops that the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Development is already developing on rights, gender and the 
economy of care for rural producers.  Gender awar eness training plan with 
agricultural extension workers 
designed and implemented  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team , 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  $78,333   
3.1.5 Design and implement a training and certification plan for women 
extension workers, with the support of SENA and in response to the 
demand for agricultural extension workers from the Producer 
Associations, in order to facilitate their subsequent engagement . The plan 
will emphasize support strategies for the promotion of young rural women 
as extension workers.  Training and certification plan for 
women extension workers designed 
and implemented  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team , 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  $12,500   
3.2.1. Develop participatory work sessions with women to discuss the 
barriers in access ing agricultural and productive services: time constraints, 
difficulties in accessing technical assistance and recommendations to 
provide a extension service  tailored to their needs (availability of time and 
resources), which serves as input for action 3.1.3 component 3.  
The work sessions must guarantee the partici pation of different groups of 
women  based on their ethnic ity and age.  Participatory work sessions with 
women to discuss the barriers in 
access ing agricultural and productive 
services , developed  0 18 During 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team  $7,333   
3.2.2. Design and implement local work plans to promote the participation 
of women in (women ) farmers´ groups or organizations  that promote 
mutual trust, collaboration and training in agricultural and productive 
issues among them, as a tool to share  knowledge  and information 
regarding climate -resilient agriculture and  build economic and social 
processes that allow the sustainability of the implemented strategies. This 
strategy can be developed with the support of the Rural Development 
Agency . Local work plans to promote the 
participation of women in (women) 
farmers´ gr oups or organizations 
designed and implemented  0 9 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team , 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  (Rural 
Women 
Directorate ) $100,000   
3.3.1 Implement sessions to s hare  information regarding and engage 
women beneficiaries into public programs  (led by the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Finagro  such as the Special Credit Line (LEC) for rural 
women and youth and other LEC ) aimed at improv ing women's access to 
credit, financial inclusion and literacy .  
The activities shall include specific sessions for young rural women  sharing 
programs that target their population group  as well as the courses in 
Economic and Financial Education available to the Ministry of Agriculture Sessions to share information regarding 
and engage women beneficiaries into 
public programs aimed at improv ing 
women's access to credit, financial 
inclusion and literacy, implemented  0 15 During 
operation   Gender Team , 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  $5,000


---
*Page 156*
---

 
10 
 and Rural Development and the Special Lines of Credit (LEC) that benefit 
women.  
3.3.2 Implement sessions to share information regarding and engage 
women beneficiaries into public programs (led by the Ministry of 
Agriculture and the National Land Agency ) aimed at improving women's 
access to land . The National Land Agency has awareness plans about the 
different processes of access and formalization of rural property for 
natural persons or persons belonging to ethnic groups.  
(Women -only a ctivities). Sessions to share information regarding 
and engage women beneficiaries into 
publ ic programs aimed at improving 
women's access to land, implemented  0 15 During 
operation   Gender Team , 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  $5,000   
3.4.1 Create  a document prioritizing the areas (municipalities, townships,  
rural counties ) where to install the care service s/facilities  of the local pilot 
projects . The document must include at least:  
- Selection c riteria  
- Budget. The convergence of different sources of public, private and 
international cooperation  funding  will be sought  Document prioritizing the areas 
(municipalities, townships, rural 
counties) where to install the care 
services/facilities of the local pi lot 
projects, created  0 9 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team , 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  $0  
3.4.2 Implement a care needs assessment and design an action plan with  
(direct and indirect) women  beneficiaries  in the  prioritized  areas (it must 
be ensured that not only women belonging to organizations or formal 
groups  participate) in order to design and implement a pilot  project  that 
offers several care services/facilities aimed to  reduc e the time allocated to  
unpaid care work . It is expected to have the participation not only of the 
actors of the CSICAP  project but also of public agencies  of the social 
inclusion sector of the national government (Prosperidad Social, ICBF, 
Ministry of Health ) and the M inistry of the Envi ronment , as well as local 
governments, among others.  
The strategy include s, at a minimum:  
- Inclusive call for  participants  
- care needs assessment document  
- Pilots´ action plan based on  the needs and characteristics of the territory  
- Liaison strategy  with local and national actors  Care needs assessment and action plan 
of a local care services pilot project  
designed and implemented with (direct 
and indirect) women beneficiaries  0 1 Pre 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team  
Ministry of 
Agriculture  $14,444   
3.4.3 Design , validate , and implement with  a participatory  methodology, a 
pool of care service s bases on  what was identified in the previous activity . 
Among the possible services , the pilot  will provide  one service per 
Producer Association  from among those that follow, and three nurseries 
will also be implemented  (or care centers that operate year -round or 
during harvest seasons ): 
- Transportation service for children to public care facilitie s (Madres 
Comunitarias and other ICBF services) a nd those provided by the Producer 
Association  
- Commun ity laundry facilities  (It must be guaranteed that the spaces 
where this service is provided have the conditions to guarantee that the 
service is effectively provided).  
- Community dining rooms for children, people with disabilities and the 
elderly.  Local care services pilot project 
implemented  0 9 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team  
Ministry of 
Agriculture  $90,556


---
*Page 157*
---

 
11 
 - Efficient cook stoves for cooking with firewood, with support from the 
Ministry of the Environment  
Other specific interventions such as lactation rooms and brochures with a 
summary of the municipality's care offer will also be considered.  
3.4.4 Create  a network of daycare  and childcare  facilities  for (direct and 
indirect) women beneficiaries of the pro ject. 
The facilities will be located  at the Producer Associations´  offices  to 
promote the reduction of time allocated by  women to unpaid care work. 
The service provided will be to tally free . Network of daycare and childcare 
facilities at the Producer Associations´  
offices for (direct and indirect) women 
beneficiaries of the project created  0 9 During 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team  $192,500   
3.5.1. Develop a training module on gender equality with all the 
employees of each of the Producer Associations, which includes specific 
sessions according to the roles and positions of the employees (customer 
service, managerial roles, etc.).  Training module on gender equality 
with all the employees of each of the 
Producer Associations  developed  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team  $0  
Gender activities specific to each Producer Association   
3.5.2 Asbama , Fedepanela: Strengthen the (existing) Gender Action Plan 
that includes:  
- Regulations on quotas for the participation of women in boards of 
directors  
- Strategy to promote the inclusion of women extension workers within 
the Producer Association  
- Gender -sensitive Budget ing to identify funded activities and/or projects 
aimed at improving the conditions of women producers  Producer Association´s Gender Act ion 
Plan strengthened   0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team  $33,333


---
*Page 158*
---

12 3.5.3 Fedegan , Fenalce: Design the Gender Action Plan that mainstreams 
gender within the Association's policies and practices. The Plan must 
include:  
- Gender monitoring s trategy 
- Affirmative action s to improve the access of women producers to
agricultural extension services
- Guidelines for the dissemination of information to women producers 
(Mainstreaming g ende r on dissemination activities )
- Regulations on quotas for the participation of women in boards of 
directors
- Strategy to promote the inclusion of women extension workers within 
the Producer Association
- Gender -sensitive Budgeting to identify funded activities and/or projects 
aimed at improving the conditions of women producers
- Protocol for the prevention and eradication of workplace and sexual
harassment and any form of discrimination
- Engagement s trategy with public and non -governmental institutions to 
develop initiatives that benefit women producers Producer Association´s Gender Action 
Plan designed   0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team  $33,333  
3.5.4 Fedepapa, Fedearroz, Augura , Asocaña  Design the Gender Action 
Plan that mainstreams gender within the Association's policies and 
practices. The Plan must include:  
- Gender monitoring strategy 
- Affirmative actions to improve the access of women producers to
agricultural extension services
- Guidelines for the dissemination of information to women producers 
(Mainstreaming gender on dissemination activities)
- Regulations on quotas for the participation of women in boards of 
directors
- Strategy to promote the inclusion of women extension workers within 
the Producer Association
- Gender -sensitive Budgeting to identify funded activities and/or projects 
aimed at improving the conditions of women producers
- Protocol for the prevention and eradication o f workplace and sexual
harassment and any form of discriminationProducer Association´s Gender Action 
Plan designed  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team  $66,666  
3.5.5 FNC:  Strengthen the (existing) Gender Action Plan that includes : 
- Protocol for the prevention and eradication of workplace and sexual
harassment and any form of discriminationProducer Association´s Gender Action 
Plan strengthened  0 1 Pre and 
during 
operation  Producer 
Associations,  
CIAT, Gender Team  $16,666  
TOTAL GAP BUDGET  $1,581,314  
GCF Funding  $1,215,314  
Other sources of funding (Production Associations, CIAT, Agrosavia, 
Ministry of Agriculture)  $366,000  
Source: Prepared by the authors.  
__________