=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20211001222247+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.7.20095
/ModDate: D:20211003131428+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.7.20095
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration of funding 
proposals – Adde ndum  XII 
Funding proposal package for FP 180 GCF/B.30/0 2/Ad d.12/ Rev.01 
3 October 2021  Meeting of the Board  
4 – 7 October  2021 
Virtual meeting  
Provisional Agenda Item  11 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following six  parts:  
a) A funding proposal summary titled “Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window”
submitted by  Pegasus Capital Advisors (PCA);
b) No-ob
jection letter s issued by the national designated authorities  or focal point(s);
c) Environmental and Social report(s) Disclosure ;
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
e) R
esponse from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s
assessme nt; and
f
)Gender documentation of the funding proposal.
T
hese documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated 
authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure 
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled titled “Glo bal Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window” 
submitted by  Pegasus Capital Advisors (PCA) is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to 
Board Members and Alternate Board Members to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileg ed or commercially sensitive information of the entity.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12/Rev.01  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity                                                                            1 
No-objection letter s issued by the national designated authorit ies or focal point (s)                 60 
Environmental and s ocial report(s) disclosure                      86 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment                                                                           89  
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s                10 4 
assessment  
Gender document ation                                                                                                                                    11 0


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project/Programme title:  Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window  
Country(ies):  Africa : Comoros; Mozambique; Seychelles  
Asia-Pacific:  Fiji; Indonesia;  Philippines; Sri Lanka ;   
Latin America and the Caribbean:  Bahamas;  Belize; Brazil ; Colombia; 
Ecuador; Guatemala; Jamaica; Mexico ; Panama  
Meditteranean :  Jordan  
Accredited Entity:  Pegasus Capital Advisors LP (Pegasus)   
Date of first submission:  2021/05/31  
Date of current submission  2021/ 10/01 
Version number  3.6


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 0 OF 59  
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANN EXES   
 
Note to A ccredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to annexes such 
as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities sho uld ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details provided in the 
funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be reflected in all relevant 
documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 60 . Proposals 
exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual service standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals will be disclosed on 
the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the redaction of any information 
that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited Entities are asked to fill out  information on 
disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name ]-[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 1 OF 59 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or programme  Programme  A.2. Public or private sector  Private   
A.3. Request for Proposals 
(RFP) If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals , 
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separat e template for the 
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.  
Choose an item   
A.4. Result area(s)   
Check the applicable GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets. 
For each checked result area(s) , indicate the estimated percentage of GCF budget  devoted to it. 
The total of th e percentage s when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation:  Reduced emissions from:  
 
☐ Energy access and power generation:    
☐ Low-emission transport:     
☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:   
☐ Forestry and land use:     
  
Adaptation:  Increased resilience of:1 
 ☒ Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:    
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water security:  
☒ Infrastructure and built environment:   
  
☒ Ecosystem and ecosystem services:  GCF contribution:  
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
 
 
45%  
5% 
5% 
45%  
A.5. Expected mitigation 
impact  Indicate t CO2eq over lifespan A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact  12,737 direct beneficiaries; 
35,236,406 indirect 
beneficiaries2 
Indicate % of population  
A.7. Total financing (GCF + 
co-finance)  USD$ 500 M Choose an item.   
A.9. Project size  Large (Over USD 250 million)  
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  USD$ 125 M  Choose an item.  
For multi -country proposals, 
please fill out annex 17.  
A.10. Financial instrument(s) 
requested for the GCF 
funding  Mark all that apply  and provide total amounts . The sum of all total amounts should be 
consistent  with A.8.  
☐ Grant  Enter number   
☐ Loan   Enter number  
☐ Guarantee  Enter number  ☒ Equity   USD$ 125M  
☐ Results -based    
     payment   Enter number  
A.11. Implementation period  a) disbursement period:  
$25M first close (GCF sole 
first closer )3; 25% to final 
close  
b) repayment period:  12 + 3 
years  A.12. Total lifespan  20+ years  
A.13. Expected date of AE 
internal approval  June 17, 2021  A.14. ESS category  Refer to the AE’s safeguard 
policy and  GCF ESS Standards  
to assess your FP category.  
I-2


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 2 OF 59 
  
1 The distribution of funding across outcomes cannot be determined in advance since sub- projects will be identified at a 
later date.  
2 Based on NoLs received. Potential indirect beneficiaries based on full initial country scope of 32 countries was 46,892,587 
3 Will be increased to $50mm if the GFCR Fund procures at least $10mm of additional co-investment at the first closing.


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 3 OF 59 
 A.15.Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has Readiness or PPF 
support  been used to 
prepare this FP ? Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included in 
the entity work programme?  Yes ☐    No ☒ A.18. Is this FP included in 
the country programme?  Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.19. Complementarity and 
coherence  Does the project/programme complement  other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF, 
etc.) ? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
Yes ☐    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information  Executing Entities: 4 
1. Pegasus Capital Advisors, L.P. ( “Pegasus ”), a Delaware limited  partnership and Accredited 
Entity by the GCF.  
2. The “ GFCR Fund ” – a pooled investment vehicle to be formed by the Accredited Entity, 
which is expected to be a SCSp under Luxembourg law   
3. The “ General Partner ” – an entity to be formed by the Accredited Entity, which is 
expected to be a S.a r.l. under Luxembourg law.  The General Partner will be managed by 
employees of the Accredited Entity or its controlled affiliates, except to the extent one o r 
more managers of the General Partner are required by law to be resident in Luxembourg.  
4. The “ Manager ” – an entity to be formed by the Accredited Entity, which is expected to 
be a Delaware limited liability company.  The Manager will be controlled by emplo yees of 
the Accredited Entity or its controlled affiliates, except to the extent the Manager is 
required by law to have one or more employees, managers or directors in its jurisdiction 
of formation.   The Manager will be owned, directly or indirectly, by th e Accredited Entity  
5. “GCF Reef Holdings ” –  an entity to be formed by the Accredited Entity, which is 
expected to be a Delaware limited partnership.  GCF will be the sole limited partner and 
sole economic owner of GCF Reef Holdings.  Holdings GP will be th e general partner of 
GCF Reef Holdings.  
6. “Holdings GP ” –  an entity to be formed by the Accredited Entity, which is expected to be 
a Delaware limited liability company.  Holdings GP will be controlled by employees of the Accredited Entity or its controlled affiliates.   Holdings GP will be owned, directly or 
indirectly, by the Accredited Entity   
 
A.21. Executive summary  (max. 750 words, approximately 1 .5 page s) 
 
4 NTD:  Names of newly formed legal entities to be determined in consultation with the Secretariat prior to finalizing the FAA.


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 4 OF 59 
 Provide an executive summary of the project/programme including:  
1. Climate change problem  
2. Proposed interventions  
3. Climate impacts/benefits  
 
Coral reef ecosystems are critical in providing safety, food security and livelihoods to more than 1 billion people worldwide  
through the ecosystem services, coastal protection and economic activities they generate.  
Coral  reefs contribute significantly to local economies, especially in LDCs and SIDS, with many of those directly impacted being 
women.  Coral reefs attracted an est imated 70 million visitors annually with an associated expenditure of US $36 billion (prior to 
COVID -19) 5. This will be a key are of post -Covid recovery for many countries. Six  million reef fishers6 (many of whom are small -
scale, traditional subsistence fishers) depend on coastal -reef fisheries, with an estimated value of US $6.8 billion in 20117. Women 
represent about 50% of the workforce in the seafood sector and 80 –  90% in the post -harvest sector8. It is estimated that reefs 
protect 150,000 km of shoreline in more than 100 countries and territories, reducing wave energy and heights, erosion and sto rm 
damage; thus, protecting over 1 billion people (and their property) who live within 100 km of reefs around the world. This re sults 
in an estimated reduction of annual expected damages from storms of over $4 billion globally9. As sea levels continue to rise, this 
protection becomes vital. Current funding levels , however,  are estimated to be 3 -7 times lower than what is needed.10 
 
At the same time, c oral reefs are among the world’s most threatened ecosystems by climate change impacts. In parallel, multiple 
local pressures continue to influence the health and longer -term resilience of coral reefs, including destructive fishing techni ques, 
overfishing and pollution.  
 
Recent modelling exercises on coral reefs show that protecting areas of the ocean where conditions are most stable is a key tool 
for adaptation to climate change . These areas , or “climate refugia”, retain a suitable habitat despite regional climate change  and 
are likely to be critical in preventing further reef degradation and considerable loss of biodiversity . Their protection is becoming 
a commonly prioritized conservation target  and they have been recommended by numerous authors as a key component of any 
climate change and biodiversity adaptation program11. Studies also show that better management of local stressors c an 
significantly reduce the impacts of climate change on coral systems, increasin g the resilience of reefs and therefore of the 
communities that depend on them for food, protection , and livelihood s.  By p rotecting the identified priority networks of climate 
refugia coral reefs and reducing local stressors, some ecosystems will survive the impacts of climate change and may help 
repopulate neighbouring reefs.   
 
To enhance the resilience and adaptive capacity of the  communities, productive systems and businesses that depend on coral 
reef ecosystems , the GFCR Investment Window (the “GFCR” or the “GFCR Fund”)  will unlock  and de -risk private investment  that 
enable activities that ameliorate or eliminate existing local stressors  in the most resilient reefs  and “climate refugia” . Restoration 
efforts will also be supported to accelerate the recovery of reefs that have the highest chance of survival.  
 
To drive better management of local stressors  and accelerate restoration , investments will  focus  across the following sectors:   
 
1. Sustainable ocean production  to address overfishing , destructive fishing techniques  and enhance food security  :  
a. Sustainable fisheries  (e.g. by -catch reduction, ghost net reduction, monitoring control & surveillance, post -
catch processing, supply chain tra ceability)  
b. Sustainable mariculture ( e.g. seaweed farming, finfish or shrimp mariculture ) 
c. Sustainable aquaculture (e.g. shrimp, alternative feed, etc.)  
d. Coral farming ( e.g. artificial reefs ventures, assisted evolution tech companies, coral gardening and sexual 
propagation ventures ) 
 
2. Ecotourism  to address unsustainable tourism : 
a. Sustainably- managed h otel resorts  (which can include implementation of coral restoration practices and 
technologies in the surrounding reefs)  
b. Tourist  activities (surf, diving, snorkelling, cruises ) 
 
3. Sustainable infrastructure  and waste management to address pollution:  
a. Plastic waste management (e.g. alternative material, waste collection and sorting, plastic recycling, AI and 
digital sorting)  
b. Sewage and waste -water treatment  
c. Green transportation  (including e.g. port reception facilities to address liquid waste emitted by ships)  
d.  Clean energy affecting reefs


---
*Page 9*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 |  PAGE 5 OF 59 
 e. Offshore clean energy  
f. Sustainable a griculture to reduce nutrient run- off (e.g. , alternative fertiliser use, organic farming, precision 
farming, nutrient recycling/capture) . 
 
The GFCR Fund expects to deploy its capital primarily in control equity positions in its investee companies, although it may 
invest in minority positions and/or debt or hybrid securities on a case -by-case basis.   The GFCR Fund is targeting a $500 million 
total fund size, with $125 million being committed by the GCF in a first -loss position as an anchor investor.   
 
Ultimately, the GFCR Fund expects to generate the  following impacts12: 
1. 29,000 ha of  reef protected , equivalent to  $10bn per year of ecosystem services13 
2. Over 12, 737 direct employment opportunities  in sustainable businesses for communities dependent on coral reef 
ecosystems  
3. 2,990,048 fisherman households benefiting from investments aimed at the adoption of diversified, climate resilient 
livelihood options (including fisheries, agriculture, tourism, etc14 
4. 35,236,406 indirect beneficiaries, based on the population that is dependent  on reefs for protection from climatic 
events and for economic  outputs (e.g., fishing, tourism)15. 
 
5 Spalding, M, Burke, L, Wood, S, Ashpole, J, Hutchison, J & Zu Ermgassen, P 2017, 'Mapping the global value and distribution of coral reef 
tourism', Marine Policy , vol. 82, pp. 104- 113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2017.05.014 
6 Teh LSL, Teh LCL, Sumaila UR (2013) A Global Estimate of the Number of Coral Reef Fishers. PLoS ONE 8(6): e65397. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0065397 
7 Burke, L., Reytar, K., Spalding, M., Perry, A. (2011) Reefs at Risk Revisited. WRI publication. Available at:  
https://ww w.wri.org/publication/reefs -risk-revisited.  
8 Northrop, E., et al. 2020. ‘‘A Sustainable and Equitable Blue Recovery to the COVID -19 Crisis.’’ Report. Washington, DC: World 
Resources Institute. Available online at http://www.oceanpanel.org/ bluerecovery  
9 Beck, M.W., Losada, I.J., Menéndez, P.  et al.  The global flood protection savings provided by coral reefs.  Nat Commun  9, 2186 (2018). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467- 018-04568- z 
10 Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services  
11 Keppel G, Van Niel KP, Wardell -Johnson GW et al. ( 2012) Refugia: identifying and understanding safe havens for biodiversity under 
climate change. Global Ecology and Biogeography, 21, 393– 404 
 Tzedakis , P.C., Lawson, I.T., Frogley, M.R., Hewitt,G.M., and Preece, R.C., 2002, Buffered tree pop- ulation changes in a Quaternary 
refugium: Evo- lutionary implications: Science, v. 297,p. 2044– 2047. ;  
 C. D.  Jones , P. Ciais, S. J. Davis, P. Friedlingstein, T. Gasser, G. P. Peters, J. Rogelj, D. P. Van Vuuren, J. G. Canadell, A. Cowie, R. B.  
Jackson, M. Jonas, E. Kriegler, E. Littleton, J. A. Lowe, J. Milne, G. Shrestha, P. Smith, A. Torvanger, A. Wiltshire ( 2016). Simulating the 
Earth system response to negative emissions. Environmental Research Letters, 11(9), doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-
9326/11/9/095012 
12 Assuming the full $500 million is raised and deployed.  
13 Assumes Total Economic Value of ecosystem services at $352.24k/ha/year -  see Global estimates of the value of ecosystems and their 
services  in monetary units   
14 Based on NOLs recei ved. The number of potential fisher household benefitting from the programme based on full initial country scope of 
32 countries was 3,906,147.  
15  
See Annex es 17 and 23 . Potential indirect beneficiaries based on full initial country scope of 32 countries w as 46,892,587


---
*Page 10*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 6 OF 59 
 
  
16 IPCC, 2014: Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Repor t of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Core Writing Team, R.K. Pachauri and L.A. Meyer (eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerl and, 151 pp.  
17 Hoegh- Guldberg, O., R. Cai, E.S. Poloczanska, P.G. Brewer, S. Sundby, K. Hilmi, V.J. Fabry, and S. Jung, 2014: The Ocean. In: Clima te 
Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Barros, V.R., C.B. Field, D.J. Dokken, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, T.E. Bilir, M. 
Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. M acCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1655- 1731.  
18 IPCC, 2013: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Ass essment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G. -K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex 
and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New  York, NY, USA, 1535 pp, 
doi:10.1017/CBO9781107415324.  
19 Hoegh- Guldberg, O., R. Cai, E.S. Poloczanska, P.G. Brewer, S. Sundby, K. Hilmi, V.J. Fabry, and S. Jung, 2014: The Ocean. In: Clima te 
Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Barros, V.R., C.B. Field, D.J. Dokken, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, T.E. Bilir, M. 
Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova,  B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1655- 1731.  
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max. 1000 words, approximately  2 pages ) 
Climate change problem : Describe the climate change problem the proposal is expected to address. Describe the mitigation 
needs (GHG emissions profile) and/or  adaptation needs (climate hazards and associates risks  based on impacts, exposure, and 
vulnerabilities) that the proposed interventions  are expected to address.  Also describe the most likely scenario (prevailing 
conditions or other alternative) that would remain or continue i n the absence of the proposed interventions . Include baseline 
information. The methodologies used to derive such information, including the mitigation and adaptation needs, should be 
included in the feasibility study .  
Context : In describing the mitigation and/or  adaptation needs, briefly describe the target region/ area of the proposed 
interventions  including information on the demographics, economy, topography, etc.  
Related projects/interventions : Also d escribe any recent or ongoing projects /interventions that are related to the  proposal  from 
other domestic or international sources of funding,  such as the Global Environment Facility, Adaptation Fund, Climate 
Investment Funds , etc.,  and how they will be complemented by this project/programme (e.g. scaling up, replication, etc.) . Please 
identify current gaps  and barriers  regarding recent or ongoing projects and elaborate further how this project/programme 
complements or addresses these.  
 
IMPACT OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON CORAL REEFS  
Climate change is warming the oceans . The consequences of climate change are already significant and will intensify into the 
future with global temperature expected to increase by 1.5  – 4.8oC by 2100 and precipitation patterns predicted to undergo 
spatial and temporal alterations16. For the global marine environment, the average sea surface temperatures (SST) of the Indian, 
Atlantic, and Pacific O ceans have already increased by 0.65 °C, 0.41 °C, and 0.31°C respectively during 1950– 200917 (Figure  1). 
Average global sea levels are incre asing by an average of 3.2 mm per year  (over the period of 1993 to 2010) . This is driven by the 
expansion of the warming ocean  and the melting of land ice18. Under current climate trajectories (RCP 8.5) the increase in s ea 
surface temperature (SST) across six major coral reef ocean provinces  is expected to rise between 0.67 °C to 0.83°C by 2040 and 
2.66° C and  3.14°C by 2100. Even under moderate emissions scen arios (RCP 4.5) the SST in the major coral regions is expected to 
rise between 1.18 and 1.44°C by the end of the century.  
 
Figure 1:   Sea Surface Temperature Projections19


---
*Page 11*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 7 OF 59 
 
  
20 L. Burke, K. Reytar, M. D. Spalding, A. L. Perry, Reefs at Risk Revisi ted (World Resources Institute, The Nature Conservancy, WorldFish 
Center, International Coral Reef Action Network, UNEP World Conservation Monitoring Centre, and Global Coral Reef Monitoring Network, 
Washington, DC, 2011).  
21 Hoegh- Guldberg O and Poloczansk a ES (2017) Editorial: The Effect of Climate Change across Ocean Regions.  Front. Mar. Sci. 4:361. doi: 
10.3389/fmars.2017.00361   
 
 
 
Coral s die if they get too hot . Globalized and intensifying anthropogenic impacts on coral reefs, coupled with increasing seawater 
temperatures and changing ocean chemistry, have transformed coral and fish communities, reduced coral growth rates, 
diminished the capacity of coral reef eco systems to be resilient to shocks, undermined the ability of coral reef ecosystems to 
maintain structures, and severely weakened their ability to continue providing valuable ecosystem goods and services to peopl e. 
Increasing anthropogenic and climate press ures have caused the loss of half the live coral cover on coral reefs over the last 30 –
50 years. Local pressures have also severely impacted 60% of reefs and the combination of local anthropogenic disturbance and  
ocean warming means that up to 75% of reefs  are already considered threatened20. Of even greater concern is that even lower 
greenhouse gas emission scenarios (such as Representative Concentration Pathway RCP 4.5) are likely to drive the elimination of 
most warm -water coral reefs by 2040– 2050. Coral  reefs are projected to decline to 10 -30 per cent of former cover at 1.5°C 
warming and to less than 1 per cent at 2°C warming (IPBES 2019). At current rate of warming (RCP 8.5) the coral biome could b e 
effectively extinct (<1% live cover) by the middle of this century.  
 Figure 3: Coral Reef Provinces
21 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Coral Triangle & 
SE Asia  
Western Pacific  
Eastern  Indian 
Ocean  
Western Indian 
Ocean  
Coral Triangle & 
SE Asia  
Eastern Pacific


---
*Page 12*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 8 OF 59 
 
  
22 Gardner, T.A.; Côté, I.M.; Gill, J.A.; Grant, A.; Watkinson, A.R. Long -Term Region- Wide Declines in Caribbean Corals. Science2003,301, 
958– 960. 
23 Hughes, T. P. 1994. Catastrophes, phase shifts, and large- scale  degradation of a Caribbean coral reef. Science 265:1547– 1551. 
24 Sully, S., Burkepile, D.E., Donovan, M.K. et al. A global analysis of coral bleaching over the past two decades. Nat Commun 10, 1264 (2019). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467- 019-09238- 2 Some reefs are more vulnerable than others . Although the decline in coral reefs is a globally consistent phenomenon (with all 
reefs showing some form of decline), the rate and extent of reef condition decline contains significant regional and localise d 
variation due to both v ariation in global and regional ocean conditions and the intensity of local stressors.  The western Atlantic 
appears to have warmed sooner than other areas and began to experience regular bleaching events sooner than most other 
locations.  The abundance of r eef building corals had already declined across the Caribbean by more than 80% by the turn of the 
millennia (1977– 2001)22. This is in addition to the problems of intense local stressors on coral reefs in the region whereby  the 
end of last century there had been dramatic phase shift from corals to seaweeds occurring on Jamaican reefs23. At the same time 
within the Great Barri er Reef, the decline in coral cover was about 51%. A global study of bleaching over the last two decades 
reinforces this regional and localised variation with significant bleaching being more widespread and significant within the 
Caribbean reef areas (figu re 4 below).  
 
Figure 4:  A global analysis of coral bleaching over the past two decades24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
IMPACT OF OTHER HUMAN ACTIVITIES  ON CORAL REEFS 
 
Climate change is not  the only problem reefs have to contend with . Further to global warming and climate change, ambitions 
for economic development and a higher quality of life have led to unsustainable practices that degrade coral reef ecosystems.  
These include overfishing, destructive fishing (e.g., blast and cyanide fi shing), nutrient loading from agricultural runoff, litter (e.g., 
plastics and derelict fishing gear), the drainage of coastal wetlands, discharge of sewage, fertilizers and other contaminant s into 
coastal waters and the deforestation and reclamation of man grove forests in particular for urban development and aquaculture, 
irresponsible tourism and poor waste management (e.g., untreated sewage effluent, chemical leaks). These local drivers of 
degradation are deteriorating the resilience of coral reef ecosyste ms to climate change and jeopardizing vital ecosystem services 
for which the reef- dependent communities in the targeted countries have few other alternatives for income, subsistence and 
coastal protection. Root causes of local degradation of coral reef eco systems include:  
 
• Overfishing  and poor management of reef resources . A major driver of reef degradation is the impact of both artisanal and 
industrial fisheries. Excessive catch sizes coupled with destructive methods can decimate fish populations and damag e the 
reef structure. The problem is often compounded by the absence of a coherent management strategy for reef resources. 
Interventions such as fishing licenses, marine protected areas and minimum size controls can all reduce the pressure on coral  
reefs. Most important is the need for adequate funding and enforcement of management policies.  Greater funding and 
integration of relevant climate information into the MPA management structure is needed to ensure that MPA coverage is 
Coral bleaching distribution. Prevalence of coral bleaching presented as a percentage of the coral assemblage that bleached at survey, measured at 3351 
sites in 81 countries, from 1998 to 2017. White circles indicate no bleaching. Coloured circles indicate 1% bleaching (blue) through 100% bleaching 
(yellow)


---
*Page 13*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 9 OF 59 
 
  
25 World Bank Database  
26 See for example,  Amoako Johnson, F., Hutton, C.W., Hornby, D. et al. Is shrimp farming a successful adaptation to salinity intrusion? A 
geospatial associative analysis of poverty in the populous Ganges –Brahmaputra– Meghna Delta of Bangladesh. Sustain Sci 11, 423– 439 (2016). 
https ://doi.org/10.1007/s11625- 016-0356- 6 increased, climate -proofed an d managed effectively to sustain ecosystem services and adaptation benefits provided by coral 
reefs and related ecosystems.  
 
• Poverty and the lack of economic opportunities . Reef- dependent communities often consist of vulnerable populations, 
mostly women, girls and indigenous communities who are disproportionately affected by climate variabilities, with few 
opportunities to generate income. In the targeted countries more than 85 million people (17% of total) live on less than 
US$1.90 per day and over  323 million people (63% of total) live on less than US$5.50 per day25. To support their families, 
individuals will resort to overfishing, destructive fishing, destruction of mangroves for timber and unsustainable  aquaculture 
(such as intensive  shrimp farming). These economic models deliver short -term benefits but have been shown to be ill suited 
to supporting wealth creation for the  poor est and most marginalised26.  More sustainable models of aquaculture, fishing and 
tourism need to be adopted. In addition, diversified  economic opportunities are needed for reef- dependent communities to 
reduce pressure on reefs .  
 
• Increasing coastal development . Development of coastal areas, including large tourism and infrastructure  projects , often 
fail to account for the detrimental effect they have on coral reefs and related ecosystems . Such activities impact reefs  directly 
through both direct destruction and increased sedimentation from poorly managed construction. Coastal development must 
take into account the impact on coral reefs and associated ecosystems. In particular, we need to factor in the importance of 
the role reefs play in climate resilience.  
 
• Unsustainable or uncontrolled tourism. Most tour operators and managers have limited knowledge about the impacts of 
climate change on coral reefs and its potential impact on tourism and their livelihoods. Further more, a lack of understanding 
of the impacts of irresponsible coral reef tourism means that reefs can be severely degraded by tourists touching, polluting 
or breaking off parts of the reef. Overcapacity of sites can lead to stressful conditions for marine and coas tal species. 
Responsible or regenerative tourism practices must be integrated to transform the sector away from coral reef degradation in target countries.  
 
• Pollution & waste . Communities in the targeted countries often have poor systems in place for the t reatment of sewage, 
wastewater, floodwater and agricultural runoff including erosion and sedimentation. This can lead to increased algal growth, 
the smothering of reefs from sediments and compromised coral physiological and ecological functioning. Financin g for 
renovations in water treatment, and stronger control of agricultural runoff are needed.  The management of plastics and 
other waste can be severely lacking in some coral reef sites. Marine plastics cause untold damage to coral reefs and related ecosys tems. Educational campaigns and waste management infrastructure are needed to reduce litter reaching coral reefs, 
which compromises the health of the entire ecosystem.  
 
• Limits to our ability to restore coral reefs . Once degraded or destroyed, coral reefs are extremely hard to restore. Coral reef 
restoration is a dynamic space that is evolving as new advances emerge. At this stage, it is still difficult to scale -up and speed-
up coral reef restoration efforts to keep  pace with the rate of degradation. There is a need for greater investment into 
restoration efforts to identify climate change resilient coral species and techniques to maximize their growth and 
recolonization in degraded reef habitats.  
 
Local  impacts on c oral reefs can compound the impact of  climate change. Direct human -induced negative impacts on marine 
biodiversity and coastal habitats exacerbate the impact of ocean warming and acidification. Increasing global climate and local anthropogenic pressures ha ve caused the loss of warm- water coral reefs by at least 50% over the past 30 –50 years in large 
parts of the world's tropical regions. Warm -water coral reefs are largely dependent on the physical and chemical changes 
occurring in the surface layers of the ocean. Already weakened, coral reefs are more prone to suffer diseases and outbreaks of 
invasive alien species, which further degrade  the ecosystem. Uncontrolled tourism, land reclamation and poorly managed 
coastal zone development also contribute s to the demise of the ecosystem, which undermines the natural assets on which 
national and local economies are built. These pressures are observed in each of the target countries. From a reef management


---
*Page 14*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 10 OF 59 
 
  
27 Ove Hoegh- Guldberg , Elvira S. Poloczanska , William Skirving and Sophie Dove 2017,Coral Reef Ecosystems under Climate Change and 
Ocean Acidification Front. Mar. Sci., 29 May 2017 Https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2017.00158  
28 Cacciapaglia, C.W. and van Woesik, R. (2020), Reduced carbon emissions and fishing pressure are both necessary for equatorial  coral reefs 
to keep up with rising seas. Ecography, 43: 789- 800. https://doi.org/10.1111/ecog.04949  
29 Burke, L., Reytar, K., Spalding, M., Perry, A. (2011) Reefs at Risk Revisited. WRI publication. Available at:  
https://www.wri.org/publication/reefs -risk-revisited.  
30 Northrop, E., et al. 2020. ‘‘A Sustainable and Equitable Blue Recovery to the COVID -19 Cr isis.’’ Report. Washington, DC: World Resources 
Institute. Available online at http://www.oceanpanel.org/ bluerecovery  
31 Beck, M.W., Losada, I.J., Menéndez, P.  et al.  The global flood protection savings provided by coral reefs.  Nat Commun  9, 2186 (2018). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467- 018-04568- z 
32 Coral Reefs | Resource Watch   
33 Spalding, M, Burke, L, Wood, S, Ashpole, J, Hutchison, J & Zu Ermgassen, P 2017, 'Mapping the global value  and distribution of coral reef 
tourism', Marine Policy , vol. 82, pp. 104- 113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2017.05.014 
34 Spalding, M, Burke, L, Wood, S, Ashpole, J, Hutchison, J & Zu Ermgassen, P 2017, 'Mapping the global value and distribution of coral reef 
tourism', Marine Policy , vol. 82, pp. 104- 113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2017.05.014 
35 “The Coral Reef Economy”, ICRI, UN Environment, ISU. October 2018.  and policy perspective, climate change and ocean acid ification increase  the need to abate other stress factors on reefs.27   
 
Local action can help protect coral reefs from climate change. Although, the global outlook for  corals is bleak  there is evidence 
from a range of field studies and modelling exercises that suggest that  efforts to manage local impacts on coral reefs can  
ameliorate the impact of rising temperatures and ocean acidification . For example, models suggest that the ability of coral  reefs 
to maintain reef building capabilities and keep up with sea lev el rise is  significantly enhanced if targeted management of local 
fishing and water quality are undertaken28. 
 
ECONOMIC VALUE OF CORAL REEFS  
 
The global value of coral reefs  as an ecosystem service or asset to the economy is well understood.  There are several studies 
which collectively demonstrate that the value in terms of ecosystem services to the tourism and fisheries sectors, as well as 
coastal  protection and safeguarding of coastal infrastructure is indeed very significant.  
 
Reef fisheries provide incomes to the most vulnerable . Six million reef fishers (many of whom are small -scale, traditional 
subsistence fishers) depend on coastal -reef fisheries, with an estimated value of US $6.8 billion in 201129. Women represent 
about 50% of the workforce in the seafood sector and 80 –  90% in t he post -harvest sector30. It is estimated that reefs protect 
150,000 km of shoreline in more than 100 countries and territories, reducing wave energy and heights, erosion and storm 
damage; thus, protecting over 1 billion people (and their property) who liv e within 100 km of reefs around the world. This 
results in an estimated reduction of annual expected damages from storms of over $4 billion globally31. As sea levels continue 
to rise, this protection becomes vital.      
 
Coral reefs are a major tourist att raction . Coral reefs underpin the tourism proposition of many tropical countries.  Globally 
speaking, according to Resource Watch32, coral reefs attracted an estimated 70 million visitors annually with an associated 
expenditure of US $36 billion (prior to COVID -19)33.Researchers looked at how the value of coral reef tourism was spatially 
distributed34. It concludes that that over 30% of the world’s reefs are of value in the tourism sector with a total estimated value 
of $36 billion; over 9% of all  coastal tourism value in the world’s reef countries.   
 Coral reefs are economically important across the world . UNEP, the Prince of Wales International Sustainability Unit (ISU) and 
ICRI conducted a study
35 which aims to make the business case for the private and public sectors to invest in protection, 
preservation and enhancement of coral reef health. The researchers developed a quantitative model of selected interactions 
between live coral cover and economic returns generated by three sectors: tourism, coastal development and commercial 
fisheries; in two  regions: Coral Triangle and Mesoamerican Reef. More importantly, the study compares future returns between 
2017 and 2030 under a “future healthy scenario” or a “degraded reef scenario”.  ICRI has also estimated the value of coral reefs 
in the Indian Ocean and South East Asia regions. And The  Nature Conservancy did a similar study for the Caribbean.  Some key 
takeaways from these studies :


---
*Page 15*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 11 OF 59 
 
  
36 “The Coral Reef Economy”,  ICRI, UN Environment, ISU. October 2018.  
37 “The Coral Reef Economy”, ICRI, UN Environment, ISU. October 2018.  
38 ICRI. Indian Ocean Fact Sheet. 2018. Available at:  https://www.icriforum.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/12/ICRI%20Indian%20Ocean%20Factsheet_0.pdf   
39 ICRI. South East Asia Fact Sheet. 2018. Available at: https://www.icriforum.org/wp -
content/uploads/2019/12/ICRI%20South%20East%20Asia%20Factsheet_0.pdf   
40 The Nature Conservancy. “Reef -Adjacent Tourism Value of Caribbean Coral Reefs”. 2018.  • Mesoamerican Reef  (Mexico, Belize, Guatemala and Honduras).  Total economic returns between 2017 and 2030 under the 
healthy scenario are estimated at $108 billion to 2030 under the healthy scenario, compared to $73 billion to 2030 under 
the degraded scenari o. This represents a net -benefit from healthy reefs of $34.6 billion in the 14 years.36    
 
• Coral Triangle  (Indonesia, Philippines, Malaysia, PNG, Solomon Islands. East Timor) . Total economic returns between 2017 
and 2030 under the healthy scenario are estimated at $225 billion to 2030 under the healthy scenario, compared to $188 billion to 2030 under the degraded scenario. This represents a net -benefit from healthy reefs of $36.7 billion in the 14 
years.
37 
 
• Indian Ocean.  It is estimated that 28,000 km 2 of reefs provide US $2 billion annually to the economies of the countries  
bordering the Indian Ocean. 70% of the benefits are in the tourism sector, while fisheries represent the remainder. Almost 
3,000 businesses depend on coral reef health and at least 1 .5 million people rely on reef fisheries for their livelihood.38  
 
• Southeast  Asia. Some 70,000 km2 of reefs in the region provide tangible benefits of US $10.6 billion annually to the 
economies of the countries. Tourism represents almost 55% of this value, while fisheries represents the remainder39.  
 
• Caribbean .  Researchers  reveal that the total value for all reef -associated tourism is estimated to be over $7.9 billion of 
expenditure annually, from 11 million visitors40. 
 
ADAPTATION RATIONALE  
 
Coral reefs will need all the help they can get in the coming decades . As explained above, widespread loss and degradation of 
coral reefs due to climate change is expected over the coming decades, however the impact of climate change and the resilienc e 
of coral reefs is greatly influenced by the presence and management of loc al stressors. Although mitigating the global increase in 
sea surface temperature and ocean acidification are widely out of the control of local efforts, protecting priority coral ree f 
ecosystems and addressing local anthropogenic stressors makes reefs more resilient to the effects of climate change and better 
adapted to rebound from bleaching events.  
 
Reef adaptation requires new economic models for coastal communities . To adapt to the threat of climate change, reef -
dependent communities need to transform their relationship with coral reefs in a way that brings together the sustainability of 
the ecosystem and ecosystem services and dependent livelihoods. New sustainable business models and practices, particularly 
in the tourism, fisheries, and coastal industries are needed to eliminate drivers of degradation and galvanize the resilience  of 
coral reefs and thus the communities that rely on them. For this to occur, additiona l investment, particularly from the private 
sector, needs to be mobilised.  
 
Prioritise protecting the reefs with the greatest potential to survive. To increase the resilience of coral reefs and the ecosystem 
services they provide to climate change, signifi cant global reductions in greenhouse gas emiss ions are urgently needed. At the 
same time and just as urgently, we need to focus on protecting those reefs that have the greatest potential to survive in a warming 
and acidifying ocean from local stressors, in  order to significantly enhance their adaptive capacity to climate change . These reefs 
then have the potential to act as source reefs from which corals can regenerate in the future if climate conditions can be stabilised. Key strategies to include in these actions include identifying and protecting reef areas that are naturally resist ant to 
climate change impacts, reducing sources of pollution that increase sensitivity of corals or increase their susceptibility to  disease, 
preventing damage to reefs th rough poor boating practices or destructive fishing, preventing overfishing of herbivorous fish and 
restoring places of ecological priority following stress events.


---
*Page 16*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 12 OF 59 
 
  
41 Keppel G, Van Niel KP, Wardell -Johnson GW et al. ( 2012) Refugia: identifying and understanding safe havens for biodiversity under climate 
change. Global Ecology and Bi ogeography, 21, 393– 404 
 Tzedakis , P.C., Lawson, I.T., Frogley, M.R., Hewitt,G.M., and Preece, R.C., 2002, Buffered tree pop- ulation changes in a Quaternary refugium: 
Evo-lutionary implications: Science, v. 297,p. 2044– 2047. ;  
 C. D.  Jones , P. Ciais, S. J.  Davis, P. Friedlingstein, T. Gasser, G. P. Peters, J. Rogelj, D. P. Van Vuuren, J. G. Canadell, A. Cowie, R. B.  
Jackson, M. Jonas, E. Kriegler, E. Littleton, J. A. Lowe, J. Milne, G. Shrestha, P. Smith, A. Torvanger, A. Wiltshire ( 2016). Simulating the Earth 
system response to negative emissions. Environmental Research Letters, 11(9), doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748- 9326/11/9/095012 
42 UNEP -WCMC and IUCN.  2016.  
43 Kavousi, J., & Keppel, G. (2018). Clarifying the concept of climate change refugia for coral reefs. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 75(1), 43–
49. https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsx124  
44 Hoegh- Guldberg O, Kennedy EV,  Beyer HL, McClennen C, Possingham HP (2018) Securing a Long- term Future for Coral Reefs. Trends in 
Ecology & Evolution: 33(12) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2018.09.006.  
45 J west et al 2017. Climate- Smart Design for Ecosystem Management: A Test Application for Coral Reefs Environmental Management (2017) 
59:102– 117 DOI 10.1007/s00267- 016-0774- 3 Preventing reefs from transitioning away from corals . We recognise that the impacts of cli mate change are likely to be so 
pervasive that for most reefs there is little chance of effective system adaptation irrespective of which emissions scenario is 
followed. The reality is that, for many current reef ecosystems, there will likely be a localised forced transition to another 
ecological state such as an algal dominated community without the reef -associated fish assemblages which human 
communities rely for income and subsistence. The GFCR will focus on interventions that prevent this transition fro m happening 
and safeguarding the livelihoods of reef -dependent communities . basis, the adaptation pathway for coral reefs needs to 
attempt to avoid such systemic transformation of the basic ecosystem.  
 
Identifying those reefs that can act as  climate refugia . Identifying and protecting areas of the ocean where conditions are most 
stable a key tool for adaptation to climate change. As was the case during historical periods of climate change, climate refu gia — 
areas retaining suitable habitat de spite regional climate change —  are likely to be critical in preventing considerable loss of 
biodiversity. Climate refugia have been recommended by numerous authors as a key component of any climate change and biodiversity adaptation program
41. Therefore, their protection is becoming a commonly prioritized conservation target. These 
climate refugia should be incorporated into Marine Protected Areas, which can provide a safe haven for species in a changing environment, buffering them against preventable habi tat loss, fragmentation and localized -climate change.
42 Ideally, for coral 
reefs, refugia should be selected to buffer regional changes in stressors related to climate change, in particular ocean temp erature 
and acidity over decades or centuries. Specifica lly, for coral reefs these climate refugia need to be selected and managed to 
optimise six key criteria43 These include long -term buffering, multistressor protection, accessibility, microclimatic heterogeneity, 
size and low exposure to other disturbances.  
 
Deploying investments to ensure resilience Ultimately, for these refugia to be effective in maximising long term persistence they 
need to be incorporated into a coordinated program that integrates global and local threat management and adaptation.   This 
broader approach relies on strong global climate action to reduce greenhouse gas emissio ns, prioritising investment to regions 
with greatest potential to ensure resilience, identification of regional threats and potential solutions and to implement strateg ies 
to reduce local co -stressors on coral reefs44,45. For the latter, k ey interventions include (1) targeted action to reduce non- climate 
impacts (2) protection of key ecosystem features (3) ensuring connectivity between reef systems (4) work to restore th e structure 
and function of reefs (5) support for evolutionary potential (6) relocate organisms where possible and (7) prioritise the pro tection 
of refugia.  
 
ADAPTATION B ARRIERS  
 
The following barriers have hindered the development of a robust pipeline and investment opportunities in coral reef protection and restoration as well as blue economy businesses, which are defined as the sustainable use of ocean resources for economic 
growth, improved livelihoods and jobs, and ocean ecosystem health. I
nvestors are still unfamiliar with the promising 
opportunities of investing in businesses that safeguard or restore marine and coastal natural capital, which is accompanied b y a 
perceived high level of risk that inhibits private finance from being funnelle d towards effective protection and management of 
coral reef ecosystems on which so many depend for their lives and livelihoods.  
 
• Low awareness of the economic importance of coral reefs.  Many decision makers are unaware of the importance of coral 
reefs – both to today’s economy and for future climate resilience. The consequence is unsustainable use of coral reef 
ecosystem resources for short -term gain and underestimation of the true economic value of coral reefs and related


---
*Page 17*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 13 OF 59 
 
  
46 UN. (2020, Augus t 25). COVID -19 Tourism Sector Collapse Requires Green, Equitable Rebuilding, Secretary -General Says at Policy Brief 
Launch  [Press release] .https://www.un.org/press/en/2020/sgsm20218.doc.htm  ecosystems. There is inadequate information on climate vulnerabilities of coral reef ecosys tems for medium - to long -term 
local level adaptation planning and investment. This undervaluation has led to a lack of public and private funding for 
initiatives that protect and enhance the health of coral reefs and associated ecosystems .  
 
• Policy, institutional and regulatory gaps . International and national policies have not been ambitious or effective enough to 
address the impacts of climate change on coral reefs and prevent their degradation. Ministries and Authorities regularly fail  
to balance c oastal and marine zone development with  social or  environmental  imperatives or integrate climate change 
impacts into planning and management, and legal and regulatory frameworks are insufficient to prevent degradation or even 
destruction of coral reef ecos ystems. Capacity development to improve awareness of (1) the drivers of community 
vulnerabilities and livelihoods and (2) the true value of coral reefs and related ecosystems as natural assets that underpin local economies and subsistence is required to upgrade protection and management of these ecosystems. Integration of 
natural capital accounting systems (for coral and related ecosystems) could help overcome this barrier. Equally, opportunitie s 
to link public and private sector investment in activities th at incentivise and support effective coral reef protection and 
management to enhance their resilience must be encouraged.  
 
• Capacity constraints . There is l imited  national and local financial and technical capacities to promote climate -adaptive 
livelihoods that bolster the resilience of coral reefs and related ecosystems . Communities require technical assistance and 
knowledge on the ecological impacts of degraded r eefs. They would also benefit from technical assistance on  good business 
practices to implement innovative financial mechanisms and benefit the community and the reef system. Women in 
particular require opportunities to lead initiatives that support coral  restoration and revive marine/coastal ecosystems.  
 
• Limited  private finance for reef adaptation and conservation . Increasingly private investment capital and innovative finance 
tools are needed to efficiently scale- up initiatives to save coral reefs and build the resiliency of communities that depend on 
them. Additionally, the enabling financial ecosystem is often la cking to channel finance to coral reef climate resilience and 
adaptation. Loan borrowers are subjected to high interest rates that comprise the ability to get sustainable blue economy 
projects and business off the ground. Credit requirements can be so high that makes it impossible for local entrepreneurs to 
obtain a loan in the first place. Public investment, which provides an important platform for private sector growth and 
development, is also frequently limited.  
 
• The impact of the pandemic on tourism. Coral reef tourism accounts for $36 billion US dollars a year in coral reef countries. 
Of that, $19 billion comes from “on -reef’ tourism: Diving, snorkelling, glass -bottom boating, and reef -related wildlife 
watching. The other $16 billion is from “reef -adja cent’ tourism, which includes enjoying beaches, local seafood, paddle -
boarding, and other activities afforded by sheltering adjacent reefs.
13  The tourism industry has been devastated by the 
ongoing pandemic. International tourist arrivals decreased by more than half and some $320 billion in exports from tourism 
were lost in the first 5 months of 2020. Millions of jobs are affected, many of which are in the informal economy or MSMEs.46 
While the economic recession is a barrier to boost conse rvation finance, there is also a once in a lifetime opportunity to make 
sure tourism is built back greener, safer, and in a climate -friendly and equitable manner.  
 
Significant groundwork has been undertaken to identify the key threats to coral reef ecosystems and the communities who 
depend upon them . The learnings from which have been integrated throughout this document and its annexes, and which will 
inform implementation of the programme.  
 
ADAPTATION PATHWAY FOR THE GFCR -IW 
 
Climate change adaptation interventions focused on ecosystems  generally attempts to achieve one more of three broad goals.  
  
1. Maintenance of e cosystem services for a target population or region  
2. Maximising the persistence of vulnerable ecological communities or species  
3. Maximising biodiversity persistence across a reg ion or geographical space


---
*Page 18*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 14 OF 59 
 
  
47  Hawthorne L. Beyer et al (2018)  Risk ‐sensitive planning for conserving coral reefs under rapid climate change Conservation Letters. 
2018;11:e12587 
48 Hawthorne L. Beyer et al (2018)  Risk ‐sensitive planning for conserving coral reefs under rapid climate change Conservation Letters. 
2018;11:e12587   
For the GFCR Investment Window the first and second goal s are the priorities; to protect vulnerable coastal communities and 
vulnerable coral reef species.  We believe that the third goal –  maximising biodiversity –  will follow in time if we are able to 
shephard coastal communities and coral reef species through the difficult transition period. Therefore, the GFCR Investment 
Window intends to target  the most resilient reefs (identifying climate refugia) by identifying those areas most likely to be either 
more resilient to climate change or those regions localities where the impacts of climate change will be less extreme, e.g.  the 
“50 Reefs” project47. Within this set of resilient reefs, priority should be focussed towards those refugia that provide important 
local ecosystem services and maximise ecological or conservation value .  
 
We propose to locate the most resilient reefs to climate change and to enable activities that ameliorate or eliminate existin g local 
stressors. It is believed that protecting the identified priority networks of climate refugia coral reefs and reducing loca l stressors, 
some ecosystems will survive the impacts of climate change and may help repopulate neighbouring reefs. In terms of which reefs 
to prioritise, we will select those which offer the maximum human development benefits and the best chance of safegu arding 
coral reef biodiversity for future repopulation. .  
  
1. Maximise support to the most resilient reefs (once identified) to support the most vulnerable populations reliant on 
those reefs.  
2. To create mechanisms and mobilize resources to conserve low climate vulnerability reefs that have potential to reseed 
to other regions once the climate has stabilized. In selecting these climate refugia, we will also look to maximise 
biodiversity . Refuge areas with rich biodiversity or high ecological values should receive priority.  
 
There are two risks here. The first  is that the process due to inadequate knowledge or poor resolution of data means we do not 
identify all of the possible climate refugia. The second is that some of the areas classified as refugia are more at risk tha n 
assumed. In the first case, the scale of the problem is so vast that no one single program will be able to identify and secondly 
carry out adaptation activities on all suitable reefs. The assessment we have used is based on the best available data and 
information we have to date. If the second  occurs it means that some of the effort will be spent in areas with limited ecological 
return. We will manage these risks by (1) using multiple data sources to identify climate refugia and (2) recognise that the 
resilience -status of the identified refugia  remains under review while additional dat a is collected.  
The 50 Reef Initiative . This GFCR’s approach is predicated on the findings of the 50 Reefs initiative, financed by Paul G. Allen 
Family Foundation, Tiffany & Co. and Bloomberg Philanthropies, which aims to protect 50 Reefs so they are resilient to climate change, promote adoption of science -based fisheries and marine protection policies in 10 countries, and support 20 countries 
in achieving fishing activity transparency. Importantly, the 50 Reefs ini tiative has identified an optimum global portfolio of reefs 
for targeting coral reef conservation that have the potential to survive the impacts of accelerating climate change. This is based 
on a peer reviewed global analysis of existing reefs against a ra nge of climate and non -climatic existing and projected stressors 
48 (see figure 7 for schematic of selection process).  By making the identified coral reefs priority conservation sites, it is 
expected that these areas will also have the ability to repopulate neighbouring reefs that suffer degradation from climate change. In turn, the project will work with reef -dependent communities to adapt their activities to reduce local impacts on 
CRAEs to augment the resiliency of reefs. Taking action for the regeneration and protection of coral reefs constitutes a direct 
intervention  to preserve exceptional biodiversity and reduce the exposure and vulnerability of reef -dependent populations and 
economies at the frontlines of climate change
 
Projections of Future Coral Bleaching Conditions using IPCC CMIP6 Models . This is a  publication  by the United Nations 
Environment Programme (which identifies Indonesia , western Australia, the Bahamas, Madagascar, India, and Malaysia as 
countries with the highest proportions of climate refugia) and Coral Reef Rescue by WWF: This approach builds on r elated work 
undertaken by UNEP’s Coral Reef Unit and WWF’s Coral Reef Rescue initiative (which focuses on building the resilience of cora l 
reefs and the communities dependent on them by securing reefs in 7 main countries –Fiji, Solomon Islands, Indonesia, 
Philippines, Madagascar, Tanzania and Cuba –that account for 70% of the regeneration capacity of coral reefs globally). It is 
believed that protecting the identified priority networks of climate refugia coral reefs and reducing local stressors, some 
ecosyste ms will survive the impacts of climate change and may help repopulate neighbouring reefs.


---
*Page 19*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 15 OF 59 
 
  
49 Fine, M., Gildor, H., & Genin, A. (2013). A coral reef refuge in the Red Sea. Global change biology, 19(12), 3640- 3647. 
50 Sawall, Y., Al -Sofyani, A., Hohn, S. et al. Extensive phenotypic plasticity of a Red Sea coral over a strong latitudinal temperature gradient 
suggests limited acclimatization potential to warming. Sci Rep 5, 8940 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1038/srep08940   
These global studies assume that the biological response to thermal thresholds is consistent and that a rise in a metric such as 
the Degree Heating Weeks will have a  similar impact  across the coral reef biome .  There is the case however, to consider 
additional potential coral refugia regions based on the existence of coral  genotypes that are less susceptible to thermal stress . 
Recent studies in the Red Sea have postul ated that the restriction of water flow at the southernmost section of the Red sea has 
established a natural thermal barrier which has led to a natural  select ion of  coral genotypes that are less susceptible to thermal 
stress49   Additional studies have shown that there are relatively high acclimatization potential in  the northern populations  
particularly in the Gulf of Aqaba  but limited ability to cope with  ocean war ming in southern populations that are already existing 
at the upper thermal margin for corals50. 
 
 
 
B.2. Theory of change (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages  plus diagram)  
Describe the theory of change and provide information on how it serves to shift the development pathway toward s a low -
emission and/or climate resilient direction. Provide the diagram of the theory of change  (approximately 1 page) .  
The theory of change should include any  barriers (social, gender, fiscal, regulatory, technological, financial, e cological, 
institutional, etc. , as relevant ) that need to be addressed. Use a results chain of  inputs, activities, outputs, outcomes,  and impact 
statement s, and identify the how and why of causal relations to deliver the project’s expected results.  
The goal of the GFCR investment window is to enhance the resilience and adaptive capacity of coral reef ecosystems and the 
communities that are highly dependent upon them to climate change and biodiversity loss , through unlocking and de -risking 
private investment . 
 
The ultimate beneficiaries of the GFCR are the men and women located in the regions where investments will be deployed, who 
depend on coral reefs for food, prot ection, and income. Coral reefs are a crucial ecosystem for life underwater, they protect 
coastal areas by reducing the power of waves hitting the coast and provide a crucial source of income for millions of people –  in 
2019, over  350 million jobs were est imated to be linked to ocean activities and global tourism revenues linked to coral reefs 
totalled US$ 36 billion. Immediate beneficiaries will also include citizens who will be directly employed and local and natio nal 
authorities where projects will be de veloped and companies deploy their services, benefitting from improved resilience of their 
economic and social, as well as ecological ecosystem. Beneficiaries of the GFCR will include all the project developers and 
entrepreneurs that will be supported financially. Compliance with the GFCR Fund’s ESMS criteria, rigorous safeguarding, gender framework and climate impact design will also build their ca pacity to engage co -investors.  
 
The programme is designed to deliver ecological, social,  and economic resilience to coral reef ecosystems and the communities 
that depend on them , which are currently  threatened by climate change a nd other drivers of degradation  (e.g. , pollution, 
overfishing, destr uctive fishing techniques, etc.)  through a blended finance model that can unlock private capital and address 
current financing barriers . The GFCR  Investment Window  is the first at -scale solution focusing on a ddressing  the degradation of 
coral reef ecosystems  through enhanced adaptation,  based on the latest science (see the previous section). This means not only 
supporting  direct restoration activities on reefs that have the greatest chance of survival, but also creating new economic 
opportunities that address key drivers of degradation while sustaining livelihoods in the long -term. Given the dire outlook for 
coral reefs survival even in a 1.5-degree Celsius global warming scenario, implementing a strategy that can reduce current 
stressors while generating economic and social benefits is key.  
 
The goal  of the GFCR Fund is also to mobilise private capital, through an effective use of public capital, fo r this agenda.  The 
political momentum and investor interest around ocean ecosystems is growing: 14 countries forming the High -Level Panel for a


---
*Page 20*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 16 OF 59 
 
  
51 Responsible Investor Research and Credit Suisse. 2020. Investors and the Blue Economy. https://www.esg- data.com/reports.  Sustainable Ocean Economy have committed to sustainably managing 100% of their waters. In a recent survey, 72% of investors 
have confirmed their interest in investing in a sustainable ocean economy51.  
However, there are currently a handful of ocean -focused funds  globally  that usually  target only one area of the ocean economy  
(e.g. waste infrastructure,  food  production, plastic pollution, fisheries ), but there is no initiative  at scale that can enable private 
investors to deploy capital  in the conservation and restoration of coral reefs  in developing countries . The $500 million GFCR 
Investment Window seeks to bridge that gap,  with the support of the Green Climate Fund’s contribution to the junior tranche of 
the Investment Window that will enable greater private investment mobilisation.  
 
The programme level Theory of Change for the GFCR Investment Window is shown in  a diagram  Figure 8, and an explanation is 
detailed below.  
 
Figure 8: GFCR Investment Window Theory of Change


---
*Page 21*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 17 OF 59 
 
  
 
Inputs  of the programme include:  
Public- private consortium : the programme will be delivered by Pegasus Capital Advisors as the executing entity , with the support 
of its extensive network of technical partners such as SYSTEMIQ , BNP Paribas and others .  In addition, the Global Fund for Coral 
Reefs has the support of the UN Multi -Partner Trust Fund Office (UNDP, UNEP, UNCDF), the German  and UK Government and


---
*Page 22*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 18 OF 59 
 
 private foundations Vulcan and Prince Albert II of Monaco Foundation .  These partners  are designing a parallel window providing 
grants to support an enabling environment  for investment in coral reef and reef -dependent community resilience  (the “GFCR 
Grant Window ”), with funding targeting technical assistance, capacity development, emergenc y grants, and monitoring and 
evaluation , as well as contribut ing to pipeline incubation and sourcing for the I nvestment Window . While the GFCR Grant Window 
is expected to be a potential source of investments for the GFCR Fund, its remit  includes purely philanthropic endeavours and is 
therefore distinct from the Investment Window’s commercial goals.  Both  Pegasus and representatives  of the Grant Window will 
assume roles  on a Fund- Level  Advisory Board , to be convened once a year, to provide strategic guidance to both the Investment 
and Grant Windows. Section B4. Implementation Arrangements elaborates further on the details  of the relationship between the 
Grant Window and the Investment Window.  
 
Blended finance model to de -risk private capital:   the GFCR Fund is being designed as a blended finance fund, with a junior and 
senior tranche. The junior tranche commitment is intended to  unlock capital from both public investors (multilateral 
development banks, sovereign wealth funds, public pension providers, etc.) a nd more importantly private investors (private 
banks, private pension funds, insurance funds, etc.) who are willing to invest into climate adaptation and coral reef ecosyst ems 
but have limited access to attractive opportunities.   
Priority reefs systems ap proach:   As explained in the previous section, the GFCR Investment Window will target those sites that 
best fit the “climate refugia” scientific rationale and which can attract and absorb a range of tailored public and private 
investments for coral reef pr otection in developing countries. For each site identified, the GFCR Investment Window will adopt a 
reef-to-coast systems approach to investing, focusing its efforts on investments that (i) restore coral reefs through existing and 
new technologies and adaptive approaches  (e.g. ecotourism activities , innovative restoration technologies) ; (ii) address key 
drivers of degradation by (a) improv ing the productivity of sustainable ocean resources (e.g. sustainable fisheries, sustainable 
maricu lture, sustainable aquaculture, seaweed production, etc. ); (b) reduc ing or eliminating land -based pollution (e.g. plastic 
waste management , coastal agriculture to reduce nutrient run -off, sewage and waste- water infrastructure , clean energy and 
transportation).  Businesses and activities will be located on the reef as well as on the coastal area surrounding the reef .  
 
Activities  of the programme  
Four main categories of activities are identified in the programme TOC.  
These include three categories related to three target investment sectors that have been identified: Sustainable ocean 
production, Sustainable Tourism, and Sustainable Infrastructure and Waste Management. Further details of how these three 
sectors contribute directly to climate change adaptation pathways can be found in the Annex 25,  Theories of Change for 
Investment Sectors . Additionally, an explanation of the rationale for the choice of these sectors is provided in section B3.  
The fourth category relates to the activities required to set up the GFCR investment window. These activities and sub -activities 
are elaborated in se ction B3.  
The Investment Window of the GFCR will seek to deliver the following high -level outputs : 
Increased sustainable production of food:  Investment could encompass supporting fishers to adopt more sustainable fish capture 
techniques (such as baited traps in lieu of blast fishing), helping fishers manage stocks more sustainably, developing surveillance 
and fishing gear from technological advances or improvin g the sustainability of transport and processing. Sustainable ocean 
production can also be achieved through growth in mariculture and aquacultur e in a range of markets including seaweed, finfish  
and shrimp . 
Increased protection and restoration coral reef e cosystems : Interventions  may enable degraded coral reefs to be restored, for 
instance through robotic coral farming or artificial reef ventures. Alternatively, tourism investments may improve  reef health, such 
as through enhancing  the safety of reef tourism for coral reef ecosystems , or creat ing revenue streams to reinvest in MPAs.


---
*Page 23*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 19 OF 59 
 
 Growth in jobs and the local economy : Investment and the resulting e xpansion in local businesses will increase employment rates. 
Expansion in industries serving investees (e.g. the food sector for Sustainable Tourism , the construction sector for Sustainable 
Infrastructure etc.) will generate employment creation opportuniti es. Multiplier effects from additional spending within the local 
economy – both by tourists and the local employed population - will drive local economic growth.  
Improved quality of both coastal waters and freshwater sources : Water quality in co ral reef ec osystems and the that depend on 
them may be improved through multiple avenues.  These include improved plastic waste management from new business models 
and technologies that could contribute to improved  plastic use,  collection, monitoring, sorting and recycling, improved treatment 
of sewage and wastewater , the development and adoption of clean, renewable energy and green transportation , and the adoption 
of organic fertilizers, bio -stimulants or precision agriculture  in lieu of conventional inorganic fertilizer use.  Together, these can  
reduce ocean acidity, eutrophication and turbidity, as well as the contamination of drinking water sources used by communities.  
Increased innovation to support resilience of coral reefs and communities dependent on coral reef ecosystems : The portfolio may 
include investments in o utside of the country program to allow technology from another country to be imported and implemented 
in local communities so that the impact can occur in t arget reefs.  In other cases, investment may be directly into businesses in coral 
reef-dependent communities where the object will be to develop, commercialise and scale technologies and innovations. These 
innovations could include solutions to enhance cora l reef farming,  such as micro fragmentation based commercial coral farming, to 
improve the sustainability of fishing, for instance drone surveillance technologies, or innovations to improve infrastructure and 
waste management such as digital or artificial intelligence -enabled sorting of plastic waste.  
Increased market share of sustainable businesses in reef -dependent areas : by adopting a systems  approach in target reefs, the 
Investment Window will contribute to building sustainable coastal economies and regional capacity in climate -vulnerable 
countries.  
 The GFCR will seek to deliver two main  outcomes : 
Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks : The outputs of the programme will together generate  
improved food security, reduced exposure to water -borne disease, increased income and diversification of household income, 
and empowerment –  especially of women. These will improve communities’ adaptive capacities and reduce the impact of climate 
shocks.  
 
Increase in reef resilience from reduction in  local stressors on reefs and protection and restoration of reefs : The outcomes 
identified will together contribute to the maintenance and growth in coverage of coral reefs through conservation  and 
rehabilitation of degraded reefs . They will also seek to limit the key local stressors that negatively impact or constrain reef 
resilience.  
 
The GFCR will ultimately create two main impacts :  
 
Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions dependent on coral reef 
ecosystems  to climate change . 
 
Improved resilience of coral reef ecosystems and ecosystem services  to climate change . 
 
Together, th ese impacts contribute to the fund aim  of enhanced resilience and adaptive capacity of coral reef ecosystems and 
the communities that are highly dependent upon them  to the effects of climate change.  
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max . 2000 words, approximately 4 pages ) 
Define the project /programme. Describe the proposed set of components , outputs and activities that  lead to the expected  Fund -
level impact  and outcome results . Components should reflect the project/programme level outcomes.


---
*Page 24*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 20 OF 59 
 
 This should be consistent  with the financing by component in section C.2, the results and performance indicators provided in 
section E .5, and the implementation timetable in annex 5 . 
Referring to the feasibility study, describe why this set of interventions was selected instead of  alternative solutions and how the 
project /programme can help unlock the needed support  in a sustainable manner . Also identify trade- offs of the selected 
interventions , if applicable.  
For Enhanced Direct Access (EDA) proposals and projects/ programmes with financial intermediation ( loans  or on -granting) , 
describe the selection criteria of the sub- project and types.  
 
The programme’s primary aim is to strengthen the adaptive capacity of resilient reefs and the communities that depend on 
them.  The programme seeks to achieve this goal by raising  a US$ 500 million fund, the GFCR Investment Window,  that will 
enable the financing of 20 -30 companies , projects  and platforms  across three target sectors (i) s ustainable ocean production to 
address overfishing, destructive fishing techniques, and accelerate restoration, (ii) e cotourism  to address unsustainable tourism 
and a ccelerate restoration and (iii) sus tainable infrastructure addressing pollution.  The  GFCR Fund  will be structured as a 
blended finance vehicle with a junior and senior tranche  see figure 9 ). The public contribution to the junior tranche will seek to 
leverage up to 3x private capital in the senior tranche.  
Figure 9: GFCR Investment Window structure 
 
 
Programme Activities  
Four main categories of activities are identified in the programme TOC. These include three categories related to three target 
investment sectors: Sustainable O cean Production, Sustainable Tourism, and Sustainable Infrastructure and Waste 
Management. Further details of how these three sectors contribute directly to climate change adaptation pathways can be found in the Annex 25,  Theories of Change for Investment Sector s, which provides Theories of Change at the level of each of 
these individual sectors, and how they function synergistically to create systemic change.


---
*Page 25*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 21 OF 59 
 
 The fourth category relates to the activities required to set up the GFCR investment window. These acti vities and sub -activities 
are elaborated here.  
The Accredited Entity will oversee and be responsible for implementing the activities of the programme with support as needed 
from its network of advisors and service providers such as BNP Paribas and the UN a gencies ( UNDP, UNCDF and UNEP).  Details 
of the relationship between the Accredited Entity and the Grant Window will be further detailed in the Term Sheet . 
Activity  E1: Implement the legal structure of, and form, the GFCR Fund and related entities. Consummate first closing with 
the GCF.  
Sub-Activity E1.1: Procure legal services to prepare underlying documentation  – It is expected that Kirkland & Ellis LLP 
will be the primary outside counsel for structuring the GFCR Fund and preparing the related documentation.  Pegasus 
does not expect to engage Kirkland in any material capacity until the Funding Proposal is approved by the Board.  
Sub-Activity E1.2: Implement legal  structure for GFCR Fund and related entities  – See Section B.4 of this Fundi ng 
Proposal for a description of the legal structure for the GFCR Fund.  
Sub-Activity E1.3: Draft formation documents and related Agreements for GFCR entities  – See Section B.4 of this 
Funding Proposal for a description of the legal structure for the GFCR Fund.  
Sub-Activity E1.4: Consummate Initial Closing of the GFCR Fund with GCF as anchor investor  – The GCF (via GCF Reef 
Holdings as described in Section B.4 below) will make a capital commitment to the GFCR Fund of $125 million at the 
initial closing of the GFCR Fund. Of this commitment, $25 million will be unconditional at the initial closing, although 
this amount will be increased to $50 million so long as t he GFCR Fund procures at least $10 million of additional co -
investment at the first closing .  The remainder of the commitment will become unconditional at subsequent closings 
with third -party investors in an amount such that, after giving effect to such cl osing, the GCF commitment represents 
no more than 25% of aggregate commitments to the GFCR Fund.  Also at the initial closing, the Accredited Entity or 
one or more of its affiliates will make a capital commitment to the GFCR Fund in an amount equal to 1 % of the total 
commitments to the GFCR Fund.  
Activity E2:  Fundraise $375mm of additional capital for the senior tranche.  
Sub-Activity E2.1: Prepare fundraising material; evaluate GFCR Fund suitability  – The Accredited Entity has extensive 
fundraising experience, having raised five prior funds and is currently fundraising for the Global Subnational Climate 
Fund (approved by the Board at B.27).  The Accredited Entity may cause the GFCR Fund to engage one  or more 
placement agents to assist in the fundraise.   
Sub-Activity E2.2:  Draft Private Placement Memorandum and Other Marketing Materials.  Market Fund to other 
investors.  The Private Placement Memorandum and other marketing materials will be prepared by the Accredited 
Entity.    
Sub-Activity E2.3: Negotiate with potential investors and close on additional commitments to the GFCR Fund  – It is 
expected that the GFCR Fund woul d hold several closings over the course of up to 15 months after the initial closing 
with GCF (subject to extension for up to an additional six months).  See the Summary of Principal Terms attached to 
Annex 14 to this Funding Proposal.  
Activity E3:  Identi fy and maintain a pipeline of potential investments  
- Sub-Activity E3.1: Early -stage  sourcing – Pegasus has extensive experience sourcing and maintaining a pipeline of 
potential transactions.  Unlike most private equity sponsors who rely heavily on auction processes for deal flow, Pegasus 
has historically sourced the vast majority of its investmen ts outside of an auction process.  In fact, every transaction in 
Pegasus’ most recent fund was sourced on a proprietary basis.  As a result, Pegasus has, over the course of its 25 -year 
history, built an expansive network of current and former advisors and contacts that it can leverage for potential


---
*Page 26*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 22 OF 59 
 
  
52 The GW is not expected to be the sole source of potential transactions for the IW, as the IW expects to  also source  potential transactions 
through its own networks.  transactions (e.g. corporate contacts, incubators, etc.). Furthermore, t he G rant Window , in coordination with Convening 
Agents and key stakeholders will help incubate, source and mature a pipeline of investible projects to be considered by 
Pegasus  for the fund portfolio . In addition, on the ground networks of the GW will be activated to source additional 
promising deals for the IW in target geographies.52 Details of this synergistic arrangement are further outline d in Section 
B.4. 
Sub-Activity E3.2: Develop the pipeline  – As the investment period of the GFCR Fund is up to five years after the final 
closing of the GFCR Fund, Pegasus will regularly evaluate and update the pipeline.  Potential transactions will be 
screened against minimum eligibility criteria, which will be detailed in the Term Sheet .  Those opportunities that the 
Manager determines, in its business judgment, are the most promising will be selected for further due diligence.  
Activity  E4:  Manage the investment activities of the GFCR Fund, perform due diligenc e on potential opportunities and 
execute transactions  
Sub-Activity E4.1: Perform Due Diligence on proposed deals .  The GFCR Fund team  seeks to conduct comprehensive 
due diligence of prospective investments .  The due diligence evaluation typically consists of multiple in -person 
meetings, teleconferences and written questionnaires with members of the potential investment’s management. A 
financial model is typically built using management’s projections and key assumptions are subjected to sensitivity 
analysis. Assuming the GFCR Fund team wishes to proceed, the team will typically enter into a non -binding term sheet 
with the target company/project that outlines the key terms on which the GFCR Fund team would be willing to make 
an investment. Throughout the initial evaluation process, the GFCR Fund  team is in frequent communication with 
members of the GFCR Fund’s Investment Committee to gauge overall interest in the opportunity and discuss the 
opportunities and risks associated  with the potential investment.  
After a term sheet is executed and the GFCR Fund team is granted exclusivity, the team will conduct a full due 
diligence review of the opp ortunity, including by engaging third -party advisors as appropriate, including legal, tax, 
accounting and regulatory, as needed. The GFCR Fund  team also conducts due diligence on ESG risks and opportunities 
in accordance with the ESMS, its ESG Management S ystem, and will engage an ESG Specialist, as appropriate. The 
depth of the due diligence procedures is based upon the categorization of the investment opportunity and guided, as stated in the ESMS, by the IFC Performance Standards, Equator Principles and C DC ESG Toolkit. Depending on the 
circumstances, technical consultants may be engaged for additional expertise.  
Sub-Activity E4.2: Prepare documentation for Investment Committee.  The investment team prepares an investment 
memo for formal presentation and review by the Investment Committee, which summarizes the investment 
opportunity and key deal terms. Often times at this point there are several additional iterations of diligence or structure before the Investment Committee is prepared to make a final deci sion on the proposed transaction. The 
Investment Committee will then make a formal determination whether or not to proceed with the transaction. Once 
the Investment Committee has determined to proceed with the transaction, any material changes relating to the transaction will need to be further approved by the Investment Committee.  
Activity E4.3: Consummate transactions approved by the Investment Committee .  Working with external counsel, the 
investment team prepares and negotiates final investment agreements.  The investment is approved by the AIFM and the transaction is consummated.  
Activity E5:  Manage the Investment Portfolio  
Sub-Activity E5.1: Provide ad -hoc support to Portfolio Companies .  From the time of the initial investment, Pegasus 
seeks  to be integrally involved with the growth and development of the its portfolio companies.   Most often, this is 
accomplished through one or more seats on a company’s board of directors or similar govern ing body.  In situations 
where Pegasus holds a minority interest, Pegasus will typically seek to negotiate appropriate contractual rights and


---
*Page 27*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 23 OF 59 
 
 minority protections.  Pegasus seeks to play active role in value creation and portfolio company management post -
investment, often working with management teams to establish new strategic initiatives, relationships and distribution 
channels. When opportunities arise, the Pegasus team and the applicable portfolio company management team work 
as a unit to drive forward towards a positive result.  Pegasus representatives regularly meet with management teams 
to create and assess progress on growth initiatives.   
Activity E5.2: Perform regular evaluation of Portfolio Companies .   
Activity  E6:  Report to the Limited Partners  
Sub-Activity E6.1: Collect information of investees, implement verification mechanisms, implement data collection 
tools  
Sub-Activity E6.2: Organize annual audit of the GFCR Fund  
Sub-Activity E6.3: Report to LPs on financial results, impacts and beneficiari es.  Definitive reporting requirements will 
be specified in the GFCR Fund’s limited partnership agreement.  Historically, Pegasus has provided unaudited financial 
information on a quarterly basis, audited year -end financial statements, and a narrative upda te on each portfolio 
company on a quarterly basis.  
Activity  E7:  Exit assets, return capital plus profit to Limited Partners, close out the Fund  
Sub-Activity E7.1: Evaluate exit opportunities .  The Investment Committee regularly evaluates potential exit 
opportunities for the portfolio companies.  Pegasus also maintains a robust network of financial advisors who can be engaged to assist in the marketing and sale of the GFCR Fund’s investments.   Members of the GFCR Fund team have 
extensive ex perience exiting assets through IPOs, sales to both strategic and financial acquirers and recapitalizations. 
Due diligence information provided to prospective buyers typically includes information outlining the business case for 
ESG and any impact investing approaches. This information may include how value was created from ESG.  
Sub-Activity E7.2: Negotiate sales transactions  
Sub-Activity E7.3: Execute Exit and Distribute Proceeds .  “Exit” refers to the GFCR Fund monetizing its interest in an 
investee company. It is expected that the significant majority of exit transactions will consist of a sale for cash 
proceeds which are distributed by the GFCR Fund to its limited partners (including GCF), subject to reserves for 
expenses and contingent liabilities. The GFCR Fund may also seek to structure an exit that allows the GFCR Fund to 
generate interim cash flows –  e.g., annual payments from the project as a percent of revenue or net income.  
Sub-Activity E7.4: Liquidate the GFCR Fund after all Portfolio Companies have been fully disposed  
Target geographies  
As explained in section A, the GFCR Investment Window will target those sites that best fit the “climate refugia” scientific rationale and which can attract and absorb a range of tailored public and private investments for coral reef protection in developing 
countries.  
To identify potential sites for investment, potential countries were screened against three  key factors:  
1. Climate Change Resilience -  based primarily on 50 Reefs  Bioclimatic Units (BCUs) presence/absence -  only countries with 
priority BCUs for climate resilience.  Climate resilience remains the guiding principle of the fund, and therefore countries 
with climate resilience references from peer -reviewed studies should be prioritized.  
2. UNFCCC Non -annex I Status -  Only countries with UNFCCC Non- Annex I Status are eligible due to the grant and 
concessional financing approach of the GFC R. 
3. Investment and Trade Restrictions -  Target investors cannot invest in , nor will a custodian/depositary permit investment 
into,  countries with UN, US , and EU sanctions , or other tra de restrictions.


---
*Page 28*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 24 OF 59 
 
  
53 These platform companies would not have investment discretion, but rather refers to the GFCR Fund aggregating multiple 
related projects/companies under a single SPV.   
For the countr ies meeting these requirements, additional criteria including ecological reef value, investment risk profile, and 
reef dependence (% of GDP dependent on reefs) were subsequently applied. Finally, the decision was taken to retain 6 
countries as exceptions to this filtering process, either  on the basis that they expressed strong interest in involvement in the 
programme, or that they are  countries that form part of a wider multi -country reef system of which some countries were in 
scope.  Ultimately, 32 countries were selected and included in the proposal. The market  study (Annex II) gathers more details 
and information about the sites selected.  
The Investment Window  will seek to  invest in the 17 countries which have provided NOLs, with up to a maximum of 33% of the 
value of the Investment Wi ndow  allocated to a single country. The allocation of financing across countries within the program 
will be commensurate to the number of coral reef refugia, the strength of the pipeline, and the size of the reef -dependent 
population.  
Target Sectors  
The GFCR Fund expects to target the following sectors:  
1. Sustainable ocean production  to address overfishing, destructive fishing techniques, and accelerate restoration  
 
2. Ecotourism  to address unsustainable tourism and accelerate restoration  
 
3. Sustainable infrastructure addressing pollution  
 
These have been selected based on (1) impact : each investment will be enhancing the resilience of priority reef sites by 
supporting direct restoration activities, or indirect ones by addressing drivers of degradation; (2) market sizing : including 
analysis on market trends, growth areas, and latest i nvestment rounds; (3) potential pipeline  scoped. A potential pipeline of 
[$US 1 billion] has been identified to be deployed in target sites. More detail can be found in the feasibility study in Anne x II 
(forthcoming).  
Within these sectors, the GFCR Fund w ill target investments that:  
A. restor e coral reefs through existing and new technologies and adaptive approaches (e.g. ecotourism activities, innovative 
restoration technologies -  e.g. artificial reefs ventures, assisted evolution tech companies, coral ga rdening and sexual 
propagation ventures ); and/or  
B.  reduce  or eliminate key drivers of coral reef degradation such as overfishing, destructive fishing techniques, nutrient loading 
from agricultural run -off, pollution from litter, discharge of sewage and other contaminants in coastal water, deforestation of 
mangro ves for urban development and aquaculture, non- sustainable tourism and poor waste management.  
Structurally, the GFCR Fund expects to primarily take control equity positions in its investee companies, though investments 
may be made in debt and/or hybrid se curities or in minority positions on a case by case basis.  Where an investment is not a 
control position, the GFCR Fund will seek to negotiate appropriate minority protections.  Individual investments will be 
structured on a case -by-case basis in consulta tion with outside legal and tax advisors, though it is expected that each 
investment will be structured through one or more newly created special purpose vehicles controlled by the GFCR Fund.   
Investments may be made at the project level or the corporate l evel.  For investments at the corporate level , the GFCR Fund 
will ensure that the company deploys an amount of funding in the host countries at least equal to GCF’s pro rata portion of t he 
invested capital.   In addition, the GFCR Fund may invest in one or more platform companies that serves to aggregate multiple 
smaller projects in order to leverage and scale project technology and design.53 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max.  1500 words , approximately  3 pages  plus diagrams )


---
*Page 29*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 25 OF 59 
 
 Provide a description of the project/programme implementation structure, outlining legal, contractual , institutional  and 
financial  arrangements from and between the GCF, the Accredited Entity (AE) and/or the Executing Entity(ies)  (EE) or any third 
parties (if applic able) and beneficiaries.   
 
- Provide information on governance arrangements (supervisory boards, consultative groups among others) set to 
oversee and guide project implementation. P rovide a composition of the decision- making body  and oversight function,  
particularly for Enhanced Direct Access (EDA) proposals .  
- Provide information on the financial flows  and implementation arrangements (legal and contractual) between the AE 
and the EE , between the EE or any third party and beneficiaries.  For EEs that will administer GCF funds, indicate if a 
Capacity Assessment has been carried out. Where applicable, summarize the results of the assessment.  
- Describe the experience and track record of the AE and EEs with respect to the activities (sector and country/region) 
that they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme.  
 
Provide a diagram(s) or organogram(s) that maps such arrangements including the governance structure,  legal arrangements,  
and the flow and reflow of funds between entities.  
 
Governance of the GFCR Fund : 
The investment activities of the GFCR Fund will be overseen by the Accredited Entity, via the GFCR Investment Committee.  The  
Investment Committee will be comprised of a majority of members appointed by the Accredited Entity and will act by majority 
vote.   Pegasus has 25+ years of experience in private equity investment, having deployed five equity funds with an impact -driven 
approach to investment focused on sustainability, health, and wellness. Senior advisers also retain experience in government 
engagement and ocean -related investments.   
Relationship between the Grant Window and Investment Window  
The Grant Window (“GW”) and Investment Window (“IW”) will perform independent but complementary and coordinated roles 
to seek to maximise impact of the GFCR. The GW aims to  establish an enabling environment for the IW, more broadly to financing 
coral reef resilience initiatives, and ultimately to de -risk private sector involvement in the sustainable blue economy. Grant 
funding from the GW targets technical assistance, capaci ty development, emergency grants, and monitoring and evaluation, and 
contributes to pipeline incubation and sourcing for the IW.  The GW also has a philanthropic mandate such that not all of the  
projects funded by the GW will be appropriate for the IW.  The GW delivers its mission with the support of the UN Multi -Partner 
Trust Fund Office (UNDP, UNEP, UNCDF), the German, French and UK Governments, and private foundations Paul G. Allen Family Foundation and Prince Albert II of Monaco Foundation. Support will  also be provided by The Nature Conservancy, Wildlife 
Conservation Society, WWF, Conservation International, MAR Fund and Blue Finance (collectively, the “Convening Agents”).  
Although the remit of each Window is distinct, their mandate is the same: to enha nce the resilience of coral reefs and reef-
dependent communities. To this end, the objectives for each Window and the governance structure of the overall fund have been  
designed to ensure that the IW and GW work in tandem to deliver key synergies that will  maximise the impact of the GFCR.  
The integrated dual Window model enables the GFCR to build on the respective strengths and remits of the two Windows, and 
ultimately to mobilize finance from prospective partners on a global scale to support countries in improving their progress to achieving adaptation to climate change. This collaboration materialises in an iterative, reinforcing dialogue that includes:  
- IW sharing inputs to help identifying GW priorities. While sourcing its pipeline and engaging with Gran t Window 
Convening Agents and key stakeholders in target geographies, the IW will identify and raise to GW’s attention the 
pipeline gaps (sectors, technologies, infrastructure, etc.), needs for capacity building, or need for support in policy 
reforms and enforcement, that can then be addressed through disbursement of targeted grants by the GW.  
- GW supporting development of pipeline for the IW . The GW, in coordination with Convening Agents and key 
stakeholders will help incubate, source and mature a pipeline of investible projects to be considered by the IW for the 
fund portfolio, working for instance with local accelerators and incubators, providing financial support to small and 
medium enterprises (SMEs), start -up companies and NGOs to develop their  commercial activities, and undertaking site -
based studies to identify drivers of degradation and potential business models that could address these drivers. In


---
*Page 30*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 26 OF 59 
 
  
54 The GW is not expected to be the sole source of potential transactions for the IW, as the IW expects to  also source potential transactions 
through its own networks.  addition, on the ground networks of the GW will be activated to source additional promising dea ls for the IW in target 
geographies.54 The IW can also source potential investees independently of the GW. In these cases, the GW will be able 
to jointly review the investment proposal and Due Diligence as observers in the Investment Committee.  
- GW supporti ng the IW in the Due Diligence process . GW capabilities (including technical and scientific expertise), 
methodologies, local knowledge, and on -the-ground networks can be mobilised to reduce transaction costs and support 
ex-ante risk measurement and feasibi lity studies in relation to due diligence work (see Figure 10) as it relates to the 
impact on coral reef ecosystems and local communities.  
- GW improving and de -risking the business environment. GW support in target geographies  (e.g., increased local 
capacit y, technical assistance, facilitation of dialogue with local policy -makers) is expected to support the sustainable 
development and growth of IW portfolio companies.  
- GW and IW collaborating on impact methodologies and measurement . The two Windows will coll aborate to ensure 
the impact of the GFCR is defined, tracked and reported in the most science- based, systematic and transparent way 
through monitoring by Convening Agents and supported by UNEP.  
 
Four main mechanisms have been designed to enable the GW and IW to collaborate productively and in an agile way:  
1. GW as observer in the IW Investment Committee. Key stakeholders from the GW –  the UNEP, UNDP and UNCDF –  will 
be involved in pre - and post -investment activities, including sourcing, due diligence, monito ring and reporting, and will 
be able to provide guidance, knowledge and access to relevant networks as required.  
2. IW (through Pegasus) as an observer and advisor to the Executive Board of the GW , whose remit includes approving 
grant allocations by the GW. This forum will provide the opportunity for Pegasus to enhance their visibility of and 
influence over the key focus areas for the GW.  
3. Fund -level Advisory Board , to be convened once a year, expl icitly adopting a shared focus on the strategy for and 
progress of the two Windows and advising on strategic issues advanced by both the Investment Committee and the 
Executive Board . The Advisory Board’s scope includes the development of guidance to both W indows based on the 
evolution of best practices in the fields of coral reef conservation, impact investing (including investment standards), 
blended finance, investment standards and sustainable business development. The Terms of Reference for the Advisory  
Board are still under development. However, there is potential for GCF to assume a Technical Advisor role on the Fund -
Level Advisory Board as part of the National Governments & Public Institutions members contingent, which would 
provide line of sight on t he future direction of both Windows.  
4. Regular and ad -hoc meetings taking place between the IW and the GW. The UN Global Team and Investment 
Committee explicitly intend to meet at least bi -annually to align on project and investment priorities.  This channel of 
communication allows for ongoing and reactive knowledge sharing and evolving discussions on strategic priorities.  
 
Further details of the nature of the arrangement between the GW and the IW will be elaborated in the Term Sheet.  
 
Figure 10: Key Stakeholders from the Grant Window will be involved at multiple stages of the Investment Window investment 
process


---
*Page 31*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 27 OF 59 
 
  
The founding and convening members of the Grant Window together offer  deep experience and expertise on coral reefs and the 
blue economy. The relationship between the Grant Window and the Investment Window will therefore be a key source of 
expertise and knowledge for Pegasus and the investment process  to draw upon .  
The Paul  G. Allen Family Foundation  is a leading philanthropic organisation launched in 1988. The Foundation supports ocean, 
climate and biodiversity projects, including the Allen Coral Atlas and research on human -assisted evolution of coral to develop 
stocks of c limate resilient coral that can survive increases in sea temperature. The Foundation also partnered with Bloomberg 
Philanthropies and Tiffany and Co. Foundation on the 50 Reefs global coral reef action agenda, which seeks to identify the to p 
key reef systems that offer the most hope in withstanding future changes in ocean conditions and developing conservation 
strategies to protect their ecosystems and re- populate lost reefs.  
 
The Prince Albert II of Monaco Foundation  has long been active in marine conserv ation issues. The Foundation currently supports 
initiatives such as The Because the Ocean Initiative, Association Monégasque sur l’Acidification des Océans, and Beyond Plast ic 
Med. The Foundation’s projects revolve around the themes of conservation of enda ngered species, development of MPAs, ocean 
acidification, and studies on climate change and its effects. The Prince has also organized several high -profile events to promote 
awareness and mobilize collective action for ocean issues. For example, in 2017 he  presented the Coral Reef Life Declaration at 
the Our Ocean Conference in Malta, which has been signed by more than 16 countries. Additionally, the Prince of Monaco hosts 
an annual Ocean Week bringing together Member States, the UN, NGOs and others to disc uss proactive solutions to some of the 
most pressing ocean issues.  
UN Environment  is mandated to work on the sustainable management of coral reefs through its Coral Reef Unit, Governing 
Council decision 21/12, and United Nation Environment Assembly Resolut ions 2/12 and 4/13. It will support the GFCR by 
providing strategic direction for Fund activities, technical advice/expertise on issues affecting coral reefs, and effective solutions to the coral reef crisis.  
 
UN Development Programme (UNDP) is the leadin g United Nations organization working to end the injustice of poverty and 
inequality, and tackling climate and nature crises for achieving sustainable development. UNDP’s broad network of experts and partners in 170 countries facilitates access to resource s such as knowledge, skills, networks, technology, finance, and business 
opportunities. UNDP efforts in the blue economy are critical for bringing actors together to deliver integrated development solutions that deliver SDG impacts. Its country level prese nce makes mapping potential markets, by simplifying and making it 
more feasible to identify and collaborate with local clients.


---
*Page 32*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 28 OF 59 
 
  
Blue Finance  is a not -for-profit organization developing impact investment projects focused on sustainable finance for marine  
protected areas (MPA). Their approach is one of the most direct blended finance approaches for coral reef conservation and they 
have recently been awarded a design grant from Convergence for their work. They are active in multiple coral reef countries wit h 
priority BCUs (Indonesia, Philippines, Fiji, Bahamas, Dominican Republic and more).  
 
Conservation International  (CI) is a large environmental NGO that works in the world’s biodiversity hotspots. Combining 
fieldwork with innovations in science, policy and  finance, they’ve helped protect more than 6 million square kilometers (2.3 
million square miles) of land and sea across more than 70 countries. Additionally, Conservation International has a USD 25M 
conservation focused venture fund called CI Ventures. Th ey partner with Althelia/Mirova and have a strong interest in blue 
economy investments. CI also plays a leading role in the Blue Nature Alliance.  
 
The Mesoamerican Reef Fund  (MAR Fund) was established in 2004 as a private Conservation Trust Fund (CTF) to drive regional 
funding and partnerships for the conservation, restoration, and sustainable use of the Mesoamerican Reef. Its programmes 
include: Saving our Sanctuaries –  supporting the establishment and protection of an interconnected network of priority coastal 
and marine protected areas in the region; Fishing for the Future -  community participation in co -management of their fisheries; 
Climate Change -  Monitoring climate cha nge effects on the reef and supporting adaptation to climate change. They have also 
recently developed the Mesoamerican Reef Technical Assistance Facility (MARTAF), to provide financial and logistic support fo r 
development of conservation -oriented business es in the region. Examples of initiatives have included a conservation focused 
hotel and a wastewater treatment plant.  
The Nature Conservancy  (TNC) currently operates across more than 100 marine conservation projects. Several of the innovative 
financing me chanisms being developed by TNC have direct impacts on coral reefs and include an ambitious, global programme 
to develop Blue Bonds through Debt Conversions, reef insurance mechanisms and the development of novel Blue Carbon Resilient 
Credits.  
The Wildlife  Conservation Society  (WCS) has an active global conservation programme operating in some of the most intact and 
resilient places on the planet. WCS has programmes in some of the most important GFCR focal areas including East Africa, the 
Coral Triangle, an d more. The organization has supported business -based approaches to conservation in multiple landscapes.  
 
The WWF is a world -leading conservation organisation. There are synergies between WWF and GFCR in likely cooperating 
countries, and potential for col laboration to accelerate project pipeline development and the financing for sustainable coastal 
resources management and blue economies for coral safe businesses. Under a project called the Coral Reef Resilience Initiativ e, 
WWF is seeking GCF grant funding  to provide the necessary institutional enabling conditions and technical assistance to develop 
pipeline projects and support reef -dependent communities.  
Legal Structure of the GFCR Fund  
Figure 11:  Structure Chart of the GFCR Fund


---
*Page 33*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 29 OF 59 
 
 Administration Agreement
Custody Agreement
Depositary AgreementSenior LP Interest
Fund LPADelegated portfolio management
Portfolio Management Agreement
AIFM
AIFM Agreement
GP
Fund LPAGFCR Fund – Structure Chart
Green Climate Fund
100%
Third Party 
Investors
Junior  LP Interest
Fund LPAGP
Holdings LPA100% eco nomic 
Own er sh ip
Holdings LPALP
Pegasus Capital 
Advisors GP , LLC 
(Delaware )GP
GP
Portfolio Manager
Fund LPA
GFCR 
Fund 
(Luxembourg 
SCSp )General Partner 
(Luxembourg S .a r.l)GCF 
Reef 
Holdings 
(Delaware , limited 
partnership )Holdings GP
(Delaware LLC )
Manager
(Delaware limited 
partnership )Pegasus Capital 
Advisors , LP
(Delaware )
Lux AIFM
(Luxembourg )
(1) Shown as a single entity for simplicity , but may be more than one service provider .
(2) The structure of each underlying investment will be determined on a case -by-case basis in consultation with legal and tax advisors .SPV 1(2)SPV 2(2)SPV N(2)Administrator , 
Custodian and 
Depositary(1)
 
Pegasus anticipates the GFCR Fund will be a  newly formed Luxembourg SCSp, and its general partner will be a newly formed 
company wholly controlled by employees of the Accredited Entity, and which Pegasus expects to form as a Luxembourg S.a. r.l.   
The GFCR Fund will engage a third party licensed alternative investment fund manager (the “ Lux AIFM ”) within the m eaning of 
the Luxembourg law of 12 July 2013 on alternative investment fund manages (as amended, the “ AIFM Law ”).  The Lux AIFM will 
delegate investment decision -making authority to a newly formed entity wholly controlled by employees of the Accredited Ent ity 
(the “ Manager ”).   
GCF’s participation in the GFCR Fund will be in the form of a junior limited partnership interest (the “ Junior Interest ”); provided 
that, if after the final closing of the GFCR Fund, GCF Reef Holdings represents more than 25% of the total commitments to the 
GFCR Fund, the portion of GCF Reef Holdings’ commitment in excess of 25% will automatically be converted into senior limited partnership interests (the “ Senior Interests ”).  It is expected that GCF (via GCF Reef Holdings (described  below)) will be the sole 
investor in the Junior Interests.  See Annex 1 to this Term Sheet for more details on the Junior Interests.  
The GCF proceeds will be channelled to the GFCR Fund through the Accredited Entity on behalf of the GCF.  Specifically, the 
Accredited Entity proposes to establish a holding company with the sole purpose of holding the GCF’s Junior Interest (“ GCF Reef


---
*Page 34*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 30 OF 59 
 
 Holdings ”).  The Accredited Expects to form GCF Reef Holdings as a Delaware limited partnership, with the Accredited Entity or  a 
controlled affiliate of the Accredited Entity serving as general partner of GCF Reef Holdings (“ Holdings GP ”).   
Third -party investors will acquire Senior Interests in the GFCR Fund pro rata in accordance with the size of their respective capit al 
commit ment to the GFCR Fund.  The General Partner or its affiliates will also make a commitment to the GFCR Fund in the form 
of Senior Interests.   
Implementation Agreements  
The Accredited Entity has proposed that GCF Reef Holdings, acting for the benefit of GCF, will subscribe for the Junior Interests 
pursuant to the terms of a Subscription Agreement to be entered into between the GFCR Fund and GCF Reef Holdings (the “ Fund 
Subscription Agreement ”).  The Fund Subscription Agreement will set forth the capital c ommitment of GCF Reef Holdings to the 
GFCR Fund, which will be $125 million, and further specify that (i) GCF Reef Holdings will unconditionally  commit $ 25 million at 
the initial  closing, which amount will be increased to $50 million if the GFCR Fund proc ures at least $10 million of additional co -
investment at the first  closing and (ii) the remainder of the commitment will become unconditional at subsequent closings in an 
amount such that, after giving effect to such closing, GCF Reef Holdings represents n o more than 25% of aggregate commitments 
to the GFCR Fund.  
GCF Reef Holdings will also be a party, together with the General Partner (on its own behalf) and each additional limited par tner 
in the GFCR Fund, to the Limited Partnership Agreement (the “ LPA”) of the GFCR Fund, which will set forth the rights and 
obligations of GCF Reef Holdings as a limited partner.   
GCF Reef Holdings and the General Partner signing on behalf of the GFCR Fund, will also enter into a Side Letter to grant GCF  Reef 
Holdings certain additional rights that are specific to the GCF.  To the extent necessary, these rights may also be reflected  in the 
partnership agr eement for GCF Reef Holdings.  
The Subscription Agreement, the LPA and the Side Letter will be executed on G CF’s behalf by a representative of the Accredited 
Entity in such individual’s capacity as an authorized signatory of GCF Reef Holdings.  It is expected that the Subscription 
Agreement, the LPA and the Side Letter will be governed by Luxembourg law and any disputes in relation thereto will be resolved 
through arbitration by ICC Arbitration rules to be held in London, United Kingdom, although the final structure will be deter mined 
in consultation with outside counsel.  
The Accredited Entity has proposed that G CF will subscribe for a limited partnership interest in GCF Reef Holdings pursuant to 
the terms of a Subscription Agreement to be entered into between GCF and GCF Reef Holdings (the “ Holdings Subscription 
Agreement ”).  GCF will also be a party, together wi th the Holdings GP, to the Limited Partnership Agreement of GCF Reef Holdings 
(the “ Holdings LPA ”).  It is anticipated that the only partners in GCF Reef Holdings will be the GCF (as sole limited partner and 
sole economic owner) and the Holdings GP, as the  general partner.    
The Holdings Subscription Agreement and Holdings LPA will be executed on GCF’s behalf by a representative of the Accredited 
Entity pursuant to a power of attorney granted by the GCF to the Accredited Entity, which will be included as part of the FAA.  
The General Partner on behalf of the GFCR Fund will appoint the Lux AIFM to act as alternative investment fund manager within  
the meaning of the AIFM Law for the GFCR Fund and enter into an agreement for the purpose thereof whi ch will set out the 
duties and obligations of the Lux AIFM in relation to the management of the GFCR Fund (the “ AIFM Agreement ”). The AIFM 
Agreement will be governed by Luxembourg law and any disputes in relation thereto will be subject to Luxembourg court s. 
The Manager and the Lux AIFM, in the presence of the General Partner will enter into a portfolio management agreement which 
will govern the relationship between the Lux AIFM and the Manager in relation to the investment management of the GFCR Fund 
(the “Portfolio Management Agreement ”). It is expected that the Portfolio Management Agreement will be governed by e 
Luxembourg law and any disputes in relation thereto will be subject to resolution in Luxembourg courts.  The governing law and dispute resolutio n will be determined with the advice of outside counsel.


---
*Page 35*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 31 OF 59 
 
 Neither the AIFM Agreement nor the Portfolio Management Agreement will be a Subsidiary Agreement.  Instead, the Accredited 
Entity will enter into a Side Letter with the Lux AIFM (the “ AIFM Letter ”) w hereby the AIFM acknowledges that Pegasus (as 
Accredited Entity) has contractually agreed to ensure the AIFM’s compliance with certain terms of the FAA, (ii) confirms that it 
has been made aware of and has considered such terms and (iii) shall use reasonable best efforts to comply with the applicable 
obligations contemplated thereby.  
The Accredited Entity and the Manager will enter into a Management and Fee Sharing Agreement (the “ Management and Fee 
Sharing Agreement ”) pursuant to which the Accredited Entit y will provide investment advisory services to the Manager in 
exchange for the management fees received by the Manager.  
The Accredited Entity will also enter into a separate agreement (the “ Pegasus Implementation Agreement ”) with (i) the GFCR 
Fund, represe nted by the GP, (ii)  the GP acting on its own behalf, (iii)  the Manager, (iv) GCF Reef Holdings, represented by 
Holdings GP, (v) Holdings GP acting on its own behalf and (vi) each other Executing Entity (if any) with respect to implement ation 
of the Funded Activity in order to pass down the relevant obligations under the AMA and the FAA is to such entities.  
The Pegasus Implementation Agreement, the Management and Fee Sharing Agreement and the AIFM Letter are intended to be a “Subs idiary Agreement” under the FAA.  
Responsibilities of Executing Entities  
The Activities and Sub -Activities of the GFCR will be implemented by the Executing Entities as follows:  
Activity  Sub-Activity  Responsible Executing 
Entity(ies)  
1. E1: Form the 
GFCR; set up the 
General Partner and 
the contracts with 
licensed AIFM.  1. E1.1: Procure legal services to prepare 
underlying documentation Accredited Entity  
2. E1.2: Implement the structure the GFCR 
Fund and related entities  Accredited Entity  
3. E1.3: Draft formation documents and 
related agreements for GFCR entities  Accredited Entity  
4. E1.4: Consummate Initial Closing of the 
GFCR Fund with GCF (via GCF Reef Holdings) as anchor investor  General Partner; GCF 
Reef Holdings; Accredited Entity  
2. E2: Fundraise 
$375mm of private 
investment into Senior 
Interests  1. E2.1: Prepare fundraising material; 
evaluate GFCR Fund suitability  Accredited Entity  
E2.2:  Draft Private Placement Memorandum 
and Other Marketing Materials.  Market Fund to other investors.   Accredited Entity ; 
General Partner  
2. E2.3: Negotiate with potential investors 
and close on additional commitments to the 
GFCR Fund  Accredited Entity; 
General Partner  
3. E3: Manage the 
Pipeline and Identify a 1. E3.1: Early stage sourcing  Accredited Entity; 
Manager


---
*Page 36*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 32 OF 59 
 
 Portfolio of Bankable 
Projects  2. E3.2: Develop the pipeline  Accredited Entity; 
Manager  
4. E4: Manage 
investment activities; 
perform Due 
Diligence; prepare 
investment 
documentation for 
the Investment Committee and AIFM  1. E4.1: Perform Due Diligence on proposed 
deals  Accredited Entity; 
Manager  
2. E4.2: Prepare documentation for 
Investment Committee  Accredited Entity; 
Manager  
3. E4.3: Consummate transactions approved 
by the Investment Committee  Accredited Entity; Manager  
5. E5:  Manage the 
portfolio, assist 
portfolio companies in 
achieving climate 
mitigation and 
adaptation, business, 
as well as SDG and 
NbS objectives  1. E5.1: Provide ad -hoc support to Portfolio 
Companies  Accredited Entity; 
Manager  
2. E5.2: Perform regular evaluation of 
Portfolio Companies  Accredited Entity; 
Manager  
6. E6: Report to the 
Limited Partners  1. E6.1: Collect information of investees, 
implement verification mechanisms, 
implement data collection tools  Accredited Entity; 
Manager  
2. E6.2: Organize annual audit of the GFCR 
Fund  Accredited Entity; 
Manager; General Partner  
3. E6.3: Report to LPs on financial results, 
impacts and beneficiaries  Accredited Entity; 
General Partner  
7. E7: Exit Assets, 
return capital plus 
profit to limited 
partners, close out the Fund.  1. E7.1: Evaluate exit opportunities  Accredited Entity; 
Manager  
2. E7.2: Negotiate sales transactions  Accredited Entity; 
Manager  
3. E7.3: Execute Exit and Distribute Proceeds  Manager; General Partner  
4. E7.4: Liquidate the GFCR Fund after all 
Portfolio Companies have been fully disposed.  General Partner  
 
Co-financing  
In addition to the GCF Proceeds, the Accredited Entity expects to raise the remaining $375 million of co -financing from various 
third -party investors (each, a “ Co-financier ” and the amounts raised, the “ Co-financing ”).   
The Accredited Entity will lead the fundraising efforts for the GFCR Fun d.  Although the Accredited Entity expects  to do some light 
pre-marketing in advance, it is anticipated that the Accredited Entity would not commence fundraising efforts in earnest until


---
*Page 37*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 33 OF 59 
 
  
55 Sustainable Ocean For All, OECD, 2020  after the Funding Proposal receives GCF Board approval.  Accordingly,  it is expected that the initial closing of the GFCR Fund will 
occur with the GCF commitment only.  The Accredited Entity anticipates that there would be a series of additional closings wi th 
third -party investors after the GCFR’s initial closing that would  take place up to fifteen months after closing on the GCF’s anchor 
commitment, s ubject to an extension for up to an additional six months.  
The Accredited Entity intends to focus on four broad groups that it believes are aligned with the GFCR Funds’ goals:  
1. U.S. foundations and endowments;  
2. European institutional investors;  
3. High -net worth individuals from developed and developing countries; and 
4. Public and Private Finance institutions and DFIs  
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages)  
Explain why the project/programme requires GCF funding, i.e. Why is the project/programme not currently being financed by 
public and/or private sector? Which market failure is being addressed with GCF funding? Are there any other domestic or 
international sources of financing?  
Explain why the proposed financial instruments were selected in light of the proposed activities and the overall financing package. 
i.e. What is the coherence between activities financed by grants  and those financed by reimbursable funds? How were co -financing 
amounts and prices determined? How does the concessionality of the GCF financing compare to that of the co -financing? If 
applicable, provide a short market read on the prevailing of the prici ng and/or financial markets for similar projects/programmes.  
Justify why the level of concessionality of the GCF financial instrument(s) is the minimum required to make the investment vi able. 
Additionally, how does the financial structure and the proposed pricing fit with the concept of minimum concessionality? Who 
benefits from concessionality?  
In your answer, please consider the risk sharing structure between the public and private sectors, the barriers to investment  and 
the indebtedness of the recipient . Please reference relevant annexes, such as the feasibility study, economic analysis or financial 
analysis when appropriate.  
 
Investor demand for sustainable investments is on the rise, as shown by the growing supply of thematic financial products and i
ncreasing investor (and asset manager) focus on ESG - and impact -related investments . A study from Credit Suisse and Responsi
ble I nvestor shows that over a third of large institutional investors see Blue Economy as one of the most important sustainable i
nvestment topics in 2020, yet it remains one of the least invested themes across impact investors (even decreasing by 11% ove r
 the p eriod 2013- 17)55 due to the lack of investable  solutions.  
 
The co -financing provided  by the  GCF will enable the GFCR Investment Window to create a catalytic instrument that provides th
e opportunity to move away from the “business as usual” scenario that has hindered access to finance for coral reef rescue.  
 
GCF financing tackles 4 main constraints that public and private investors alone cannot tackle:  
 
i. Scale : the GCF can provide critical catalytic capital to de -risk the fund structure and mobilise additional capital to bring 
the GFCR to a significant size th at will enable it to (i)  target several  priority reefs at once and (ii) deliver substantial imp
act in terms of adaptation and systemic change by adopting a systems approach and investing in several critical sectors
. This scale will enable the participatio n of private investors by aggregating projects, providing monitoring and reportin
g and overall lowering transaction costs for individual investors who want to participate in the blue economy;


---
*Page 38*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 34 OF 59 
 
  
 ii. Signalling : the support of the GCF will demonstrate the commit ment to grow a pipeline of investable opportunities in t
he coral reef space, attracting more private investors to the GFCR;  
 
iii. Scope :  a significant portion of de -risking capital in the GFCR structure will enable it to focus on more early -stage assets
 with n ascent business models –  preliminary pipeline scoping indicates this is the case for most impactful projects;  
 
iv. Scarcity : there are still limited public and development resources directed at adaptation and resilience. Supporting the 
first adaptation fund fo r coral reefs of this size will serve to increase financial flows for these important climate goals.  
 
Several structures across the blended finance universe were analysed and consultations with potential investors carried out t o 
determine the target 25 percent contribution (see Annex 7 on stakeholder engagement and Annex 22 on blended finance 
structures wi th subordinate tranches of up to 45%) . 
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max.  500 words, approximately  1 page)  
Explain how the project/programme sustainability (financial, institutional, social, gender equality, environmental) will be 
ensured in the long run after project closure, including how the project’s results and benefits will be sustained.  
 Include information pertaining to the longer -term ownership, project/programme exit strategy, operations and maintenance of 
investments (e.g. key infrastructure, assets, contractual arrangements). In case of private sector, please describe the GCF’s 
financial exit strategy through IPOs, trade sales, etc.  
 
Provide information on additional actions to be undertaken by public and private sector or civil society as a consequence of the 
project/programme implementation for scaling up and continuing best practices.   
 
The Investment Window will seek to enhance the environmental, social and economic resilience of coral -dependent 
communities. This will mean it will invest in bankable businesses and projects that restore or indirectly halt the degradatio n of 
corals by reducing or eliminating local stressors. These business and projects are expected to live beyond the lifetime of the 
GFCR Fund .  As described elsewhere in this Funding Proposal, it is expected that the GFCR Fund’s underlying investments will 
ultimately be sold to third -parties for cash proceeds, which are then distributed by the GFCR Fund to its limited partners.  The 
GFCR Fund will be liquidated (and the programme will be completed) once the final investment is disposed of, and all remaining 
proceeds are distributed to the limited partners and any remaining liabilities are finally resolved.


---
*Page 39*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 35 OF 59 
   
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding (i + ii 
+ iii + iv + v + vi  + vii)  Total amount  Currency  
125 million USD ($)   
GCF financial instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  Enter a mount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(ii) Subordinated loans  Enter a mount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(iii) Equity  125 15  As set forth in 
the Term Sheet  
 
(iv) Guarantees  Enter a mount  Enter  years    
(v) Reimbursable grants  Enter a mount     
(vi) Grants  Enter a mount      
(vii) Result s-base d payments  Enter a mount     
(b) Co -financing information  Total amount  Currency  
375 million USD ($)  
Name of institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
Senior Investors  Equity  375 million USD 
($)  Enter  15 
years  
= 6-8% senior  
GP Commitment  Equity  1% of total 
commitments  million USD 
($)  15 years  
Enter  years  6-8% senior  
Click here to enter text.  Options  Enter a mount  Options   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
Click here to enter text.  Options  Enter a mount  Options   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
(c) Total financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount  Currency  
500 million USD ($)  
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and contributions 
(max . 250 words, approximately 
0.5 page ) Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from any type 
of guarantee (e.g. sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee).  
Please also explain other contributions such as in- kind contributions including tax 
exemptions and contributions of assets.  
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme.  
An affiliate of the Accredited Entity will make a capital commitment to the GFCR Fund in an 
amount equal to 1 % of total commitments, which will be funded pro rata as and when the 
General Partner calls capital from the limited partners in the GFCR Fund.  
The Accredited Entity will lead the fundraising eff orts for the GFCR Fund.  Although the 
Accredited Entity expects to do some light pre -marketing in advance, it is anticipated that 
the Accredited Entity would not commence fundraising efforts in earnest until after the GFCR Fund ing Proposal receives GCF Boa rd approval.  Accordingly, it is expected that the 
initial closing of the GFCR Fund will occur with the GCF commitment only.  The Accredited Entity anticipates that there would be a series of additional closings with third -party 
investors after the GCFR’s initial closing that would take place up to fifteen months after 
closing on the GCF’s anchor commitment.


---
*Page 40*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 36 OF 59 
   
 The Accredited Entity intends to focus on four broad groups that it believes are aligned 
with the GFCR Funds’ goals:  
1. U.S. foundations and endowments;  
2. European institutional investors;  
3. High -net worth individuals from developed and developing countries; and 
4. Public and Private Finance institutions and DFIs  
C.2. Financing by component  
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component  and output  as outlined in section B. 3. above and disaggregate by 
source of financing.  More than one co -financing institution can fund a single component  or output.  Provide the summari sed cost 
estimates in the table below and the detailed budget  plan as annex 4. 
 
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost  
million USD 
($) GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
million USD 
($) Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
million USD 
($) Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
Investment into 
the GFCR  Investments 
to enhance resiliency of coral reefs and populations 
that depend 
on them  $500  $125  Equity  $375 + 1% 
of total 
commitmen
ts Equity  Private 
Investors + GP commitmen
t (1%)
Click 
here to 
enter text.  
Click here to 
enter text.  Enter a mount  Enter 
amount  Choose an 
item.  Enter 
amount  Choose an 
item.  Click here 
to enter 
text.  
Indicative total cost  (USD)  $500 + 1% GP 
commitment  $125M  $375M + 1% GP commitment  
 
 
Given that the GFCR Fund is an investment fund rather than a project it is not possible to specify the funding by Component.   
 
This table should match the one presented in the term sheet and be consistent with information presented in other annexes 
includ ing the detailed budget plan and implementation timetable.  
 
In case of a multi -country/region programme, specify indicative requested GCF funding amount for each country in annex 1 7, if 
available.  
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer  (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding financ e capacity building activities?  Yes ☐      No ☒ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding financ e technology development/transfer?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
If the project/programme is expected to support capacity building and technology development/transfer, please provide a brief 
description of these activities and quantify the total requested GCF funding amount for these activities, to the extent possi ble.


---
*Page 41*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 37 OF 59 
   
 In some cases, the GFCR Fund will invest in companies that operate and have developed technologies in developed countries, 
and the GFCR Fund’s investment proceeds will be used to deploy such technologies in the target countries.  Investments will 
ensure techno logies are deployed in target countries and implemented by local communities.


---
*Page 42*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 38 OF 59 
   
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the GCF’s  Initial  
Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page ) 
Describe the potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the GFCR Fund’s objectives and result 
areas. As applicable, describe the envisaged project/programme impact for  mitigation and/or adaptation. Provide the impact 
for mitigat ion by elaborating on how the project/programme contributes to low -emission sustainable development pathways. 
Provide the impact for adaptation by elaborating on how the project/programme contributes to increased climate- resilient 
sustainable development.  Calculations should be provided as an annex . This should be consistent with section E.2 reporting 
GCF’s core indicators.  
 
• Beneficiaries : the GFCR Investment Window is expected to directly benefit those individuals engaged in reef -first 
businesses and livelihoods, and indirectly benefit the coastal communities that depend on the targeted reef. The 
number of expected direct beneficiaries ar e 12,737 –people who will have new jobs created by projects supported 
GFCR.  
• Increased resilience of the coral reef biome: The GFCR Investment Window  will seek to  invest in the world’s most 
resilient reefs because this gives reefs, globally the best chance  of survival. Healthy reefs will, in turn increase the 
health and resilience of related ecosystem services (such as fish stocks and disaster -risk reduction/ buffers to coastal 
erosion).  
• Resilient and ecologically -sustainable livelihoods : healthy reefs and  coastal ecosystems are the bedrock for 
sustainable livelihoods for reef -dependent communities. The GFCR Investment Window is expected to have significant 
co-benefits in the following economic activities: eco -tourism, sustainable fishing and aquaculture, s mall - scale 
agriculture, income generation from reef restoration, and waste management.  
• Financial returns for the private sector and economic engines in target countries : The GFCR Investment Window will 
invest in businesses which will prioritize the conse rvation and regeneration of coral reefs, which is estimated to have 
significant economic returns generated by three sectors, mainly: tourism, coastal development and commercial 
fisheries. A quantitative analysis by ICRI and UNEP found that healthy reefs ca n deliver additional economic benefits 
amounting to over $30 billion in the Mesoamerican Reef and in the Coral Triangle, between 2017 and 2030.56   
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential ( max. 500 words, approximately  1 page ) 
Describe the degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one- off project or programme investment. 
Describe the following,  if applicable:  
• Potential for scaling up and replication  
• Potential for knowledge sharing and learning  
• Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
• Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies  
• Overall contribution to climate- resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate change 
adaptation strategies and plans  
This programme is the first GCF sol ution to unlock critical new sources of funds and increase long- term flows of innovative and 
blended finance to eliminate the current ‘coral reef funding gap’ and rescue coral reefs in the face of accelerating climate 
change and –  in so doing –  secure the basis for survival and adaptation of vulnerable reef -dependent communities. It provides a 
paradigm shift firstly by enabling private and public institutional investors to participate in coral reef conservation activ ities. 
Secondly, it also addresses long -term sustainability issues by creating not only environmental, but also social and economic 
resilience by developing sustainable local economies, creating alternative livelihoods and embedding adaptive technologies an d 
techniques that will outlive the progr amme’s duration. Finally, the GFCR Investment Window programme sets a blueprint for 
other conservation efforts by seeking to address the threat of climate change by adopting a science -based and systems 
approach – in this case targeting the most resilient r eefs and focusing on addressing the drivers of degradation.  
 
D.3. Sustainable development ( max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
 
56 UN Environment, ISU, ICRI and Trucost. (2018). The Coral Reef Economy: The busines s case for investment in the protection, 
preservation and enhancement of coral reef health, p. 36. Available at: 
https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/26694/Coral_Reef_Economy.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y


---
*Page 43*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 39 OF 59 
   
 Describe the wider benefits and priorities of the project/programme in relation to the Sustainable Development Goals and 
provide an estimation of the impact potential in terms of:  
• Environmental co -benefits  
• Social co -benefits  including health impacts  
• Economic co -benefits  
• Gender -sensitive development impact  
 
Ecosystem services provided by coral reefs and associated ecosystems are especially vital for achieving nature -dependent United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) , including SDG 14 ‘Life Below Water’. In total, coral reef initiatives contribute directly to 13 SDGs through 
entry points that include coral reef tourism, food security and nutrition, shoreline protection, and human health and wellbei ng. This is illustra ted 
in Figure 8 below, which shows how coral reef -centred interventions contribute to the 2030 Agenda and multiple SDGs.  
 
Figure 11: SDGs tackled through the GFCR  
 
Social co -benefits:  
• Local skills and knowledge –  Development, implementation and running of portfolio companies will leverage existing local capabilities, 
including indigenous knowledge.  
• Capacity building –  Capacity building assistance in priority countries . 
• Enhanced empowerment and stewardship for coastal communities –  Local communiti es are supported to independently manage the 
sustainability coastal and  ocean resources as collectives.  
• Food security – Increased – or better managed -  volumes of production from aquatic food industries – and a greater diversity of 
industries – will improv e food security and resilience of the food sector to climate change . 
• Improved health and reduced disease prevalence from sustainable infrastructure limiting exposure to pollution and waste and 
improv ed nutrition from enhanced food security and increased pr otein availability.  
Environmental co -benefits:  
• Coral reef ecosystem integrity and resilience –  Restoration activities will directly address existing degradation and enhance the 
capacity of coral reef ecosystems to withstand local stressors and bleaching ev ents, thereby limiting the extent of future degradation.  
• Restored fish stocks and long- term protection of fishing industry – Reduced pressure on fisheries due to increase in mariculture and 
aquaculture production.  
• Reduction in ocean contamination from land -based and ocean- based pollution.  
• Enhanced Marine Protected Areas –  Expansion and/or improved management of MPAs.  
Economic co -benefits:  
• Sustainable livelihoods and local economic growth –  Expansion in local businesses will generate employment creation opportunities. 
Multiplier effects from additional spending within the local economy will drive local economic growth.  
• Access to capital markets –  Investment in local businesses may enhance foreign investor familiarity and comfort with operating in the 
region, thereby improving access to capital for adjacent businesses.


---
*Page 44*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 40 OF 59 
   
 Gender -sensitive development impact:  
• Empowerment from active inclusion of women in consultation processes and positions of leadership, explicit consideration of g ender 
disaggregated -needs in project design, capacity building of women and girls to enable greater roles in environmental stewardship, 
and greater financial independence.  
• Formal employment and improved livelihoods for women and girls , improved working conditions  and greater gender parity in pay, 
and additional incomes that increase the diversity of household incomes, thereby reducing dependence on individual livelihood 
activities and enhancing financial resilience which is then less susceptible to periodic shocks.  
• Improved capacity of communities to adapt to and cope with shocks to reduce safety risks to women and girls and gender violence.  
 
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups  and elaborate how the 
project/programme addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary country and groups, overal l 
income level, etc.). Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:  
• Vulnerability of the country and/or specific vulnerable groups, including gender aspects (for adaptation only)  
• Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population  
• Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payment s gap that prevents government from 
addressing the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market)  
• Need for strengthening institutions and implementation ca pacity  
 
As explained in section B1 above, scale and intensity of climatic and biodiversity vulnerabilities var y by count ries and drivers of 
degradation. However, the impacts related to the death of corals remain the same: decrease in food supply, shoreline 
vulnerability and decrease in tourism inflows being the main consequences. The most vulnerable communities are therefore 
population living on the coast lines in prox imity to reefs and more precisely fishing communities . 
Many of the 32 countries under the Fund’s sc ope are developing countries . On top of bio -climatic vulnerabilities, the national 
economic and social environment can further increase the vulnerabilities  of coral -dependent communities  related to the death 
of corals. Populations are more vulnerable to extreme events and to the degradation of reef and local governments don’t have 
the means to address the needs of the country through large -scale programs.  These barriers have been further assessed in 
Annex 2 4.  
These vulnerabilities transla te into  investments in coral positive businesses and finance instruments which are not occurring at 
the desired levels.  The Fund, thanks to its blended finance vehicle  comprising GCF junior tranche, will have the capacity to 
invest and scale up these businesses . In return, the scale up and resilience of the investee will contribute directly and indirectly 
to the sustainable prosperity of local reef -dependent livelihoods.  
 
D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
Please describe how the beneficiary country takes ownership of and implements the funded project/programme. Describe the 
following:  
• Existing national climate strategy  
• Existing GCF country programme 
• Alignment  with existing policies  such as NDCs, NAMAs, and NAPs  
• Capacity of Accredited Entities or Executing Entities to deliver  
• Role of National Designated Authority  
• Engagement with civil society organizations  and other relevant stakeholders, including indigenous peoples , women and 
other  vulnerable groups  
The project will promote open engagement with national and local government as well as select private sector entities and 
philanthropies to implement effective management of land/seascapes that integrate climate change adaptation, climate 
resilience planni ng and nature -based solutions to enhance the resilience of coral reef ecosystems in select SIDS and LDCs. This 
project will be implemented in full alignment with national development plans and global commitments including: Nationally 
Determined Contributio ns, National Adaptation Plans, post -2020 CBD Global Biodiversity Framework, the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development, the UN Decade of Action for SDGs, and the UN Resolution on ‘Sustainable Coral Reef Management’.


---
*Page 45*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 41 OF 59 
   
 Country’s will be highly involved in si te selection for project implementation with clear alignment on assisting vulnerable 
communities.  
On April 28th, 2021, Pegasus sent the first batch of official NOL request letters to 12 highly impacted countries that have b een 
identified as high priority for the Investment Window: Bahamas, Belize, Fiji, Guatemala, Honduras, Indonesia, Kenya, Maldives , 
Mexico, Philippines, Solomon Island and Tanzania.  A brief power point presentation on the GFCR initiative was included along  
with the NOL request letters.  On May 10, Pegasus sent formal NOL requests to the remaining target countries.   Pegasus and its 
consortium partners have been engaged in regular dialogue with NDAs and country representatives since the n and has provided 
them with the funding proposal.  The final version of the funding proposal submitted to the GCF for publication will also be 
circulated  to the NDAs .  Lastly,  the NDAs have been directed to the ESMS disclosures on Pegasus’ website.   
 
The GFCR  approached the following countries  for involvement in the programme : 
• Africa: Comoros; Kenya; Madagascar; Mozambique; Tanzania; Seychelles  
• Asia-Pacific: Cambodia; Fiji; Indonesia; Malaysia; Maldives; Philippines; Solomon Islands; Sri Lanka; Thailand, Timor 
Leste; Vietnam  
• Latin America and the Caribbean: Bahamas; Belize; Brazil; Colombia; Costa Rica; Dominican Republic; Ecuador; 
Guatemala; Honduras; Jamaica; Mexico; Panama  
• Middle East: Egypt; Jordan;  Saudi  Arabia  
 
As of October 1 , 2021, we received 17 NOLs from Brazil, Bahamas, Belize, Colombia, Comoros, Ecuador, Fiji, Guatemala, Indonesia, 
Jamaica, Jordan, Mexico, Mozambique, Panama, Philippines, Seychelles and Sri Lanka.  Pegasus is in advanced discussions with 
several other countries, including (witho ut limitation) Kenya, Malaysia, Maldives, Saudi Arabia, Tanzania and Vietnam.  These 
countries , amongst others,  all expressed significant interest in the GFCR  but haven’t been able to complete their internal sign- off 
processes due to COVID -19 and other rea sons . Additional countries may be added to the programme after initial Board approval, 
provided they submit an NOL and the addition is approved by the Board.  
 
In addition, following a global RFI, launched by UNDP and CFA in September 2020, several countries’ governments including 
Philippines, Indonesia, Maldives, and Kenya have reached out to UNDP to express high level of interest and better understand the 
oppor tunities presented by the GFCR. In the case of Fiji, there is already a joint programme underway (UNDP, UNCDF, UNEP) 
aimed at creating an enabling financial environment and build capacity to mobilize private and public investment capital for 
initiatives th at have a positive impact on Fijian coral reefs and the communities that rely on them. The GCFR and the Joint SDG 
Fund are both contributors to this joint programme. Further, the Accredited Entity  has successfully gathered 42 NOLs in a separate 
process for  the Sub- National Climate Fund GCF programme.  
 
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, including 
addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers, and providing the minimum concessionality  to ensure the project is viable 
without crowding out private and other public investments.  Refer to section B .5 on the justification of GCF funding requested as 
necessary.  
 
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed project/programme, taking into account the total financing and 
mitigation/ adaptation impact the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate 
benchmark.  
 
Please specify the expected economic rate of return based on a comparison of the scenarios with and without the 
project/programme.  
 
Please specify the expected financial rate of return with and without the GFCR Fund’s support to  illustrate the need for GCF 
funding to illustrate overall cost effectiveness.


---
*Page 46*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 42 OF 59 
   
 Please explain how best available technologies and practices have been considered and applied. If applicable, specify the 
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices.  
 
GCF capital has a n expected  mobilisation ratio of 1:3 at the fund level (investment window) –  aligned with other off balance sheet 
blended finance vehicles of a similar size and considered a “catalytic” use of funding by groups like the Blended Finance Tas kforce   
There is further mobilisation  expected  at the portfolio company level where the leverage ratio is just over 1: 3 (i.e. every dollar of 
GFCR capital deployed will mobilise an additional $2 .4 of debt or equity) . The GFCR aims to adhere to the OECD blended finance 
principles of additionality and minimum concessionality to ensure the viability of the Fund while mobilising private capital rath er 
than crowding out private investments .  A more detailed explanation on the  expected  mobilisation ratios at the portfolio level 
(i.e. the measure of how catalytic the GCF capital will be) is laid out below calculated by looking at the mobilisation of equ ity and 
debt for different types of investments:   
a. Equity -only leveraging effect is 1: 0.3 @ 90% of the Fund  
 At portfolio company level, the GFCR will largely take control equity positions on the target 
investments .  In many cases, however, GFCR expects to have additional equity co -investors.   
 In a conservative scenario, each $1 of equity invested in a company, is expected to  generate on average 
$0.33 of additional equity 
 Taking control equity positions will allow to Fund to most effectively implement strategic initiatives, 
maintain rigorous E&S standards and support companies to become blueprints of sustainability to 
ensure G FCR outcomes are as the core of the investee strategy. This will help develop the market to 
mainstream nature as an “asset class” –  with outsized (though indirect) mobilisation effects  
b. Debt -only leveraging effect is 1:1.5  
i. Taking a conservative approach, Pe gasus believes that, given its track record (see SCF approach), the 
average investee balance sheet could be made of 60% debt and 40% equity  
ii. The debt is expected to  be provided by additional third parties like local or international banks  
c. VC leveraging effect is 1: 3 @ ~10% of the Fund  
i. It is expected that approximately 10% of the portfolio may  be dedicated to VC investments and/or 
convertible debt / mezzanine positions. Given the nature of VC investment, the assumption is that the 
fund will hol d on average 25% of the portfolio company, granting a control over the decisions of the 
investee while giving room  for additional equity funding rounds  
ii. The mobilisation ratio of these types of investments is 1: 3 (i.e. for every dollar in the portfolio 
comp any, an additional $ 3 of equity will be invested)  
iii. Dedicating part of the fund to venture capital investments allows the Fund to participate to the 
effective scale up of disruptive technologies which will be sustainability game changers especially in 
the sustainable ocean production industries into which t he Fund intends to invest  
d. Aggregating 90% equity (with a 1: 0.3 mobilisat ion ratio); 40% debt (with a 1:1.5 mobilisation ratio) and 10% VC 
or other instruments (with a 1: 3 mobilisation ratio) the projected leverage downstream in the portfolio 
companies is around 1: 2.4 
 
b. Note that the GFCR mobilisation approach takes into account the following:  
a. The GFCR is a pioneer blended finance adaptation fund –  the first of its kind with this level of ambition on 
investment in SDG 14 for critical reef and coastal ecosystems and the livelihoods upon which those ecosystems 
depend  
b. The GFCR hopes to  become a blueprint for other vehicles –  helping standardise this approach to reduce 
transaction costs  
In other words, the GFCR should be seen as a flagship demonstration fund: its success intends to mainstream the optimal  
financial structure for a biodiversity vehicle which combines public, private and philanthropic capital   
c. Through the support of the GW (pipeline incubation, capacity building, dialogue with policy makers, technical 
assistance, etc.) and direct investments of the IW into promising ventures and projects, the GFCR expects to  set 
up solid foundations to stimulate a pipeline of investible sustainable projects and de -risk the business 
environment for other funds to follow


---
*Page 47*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 43 OF 59 
   
 d. This is expected to  also have a catalytic effect that will be more difficult to directly attribute to the Fund but is 
at the heart of the GFCR’s theory of change: two of the GFCR outputs (“Increased innovation to support 
resilience of coral reefs and communities reliant on coral reefs” and “Increased market share of sustainable 
businesses in reef- dependent areas” –  see figure 9 of section B.2) are directly related to the investment work 
described above.  
e. Investments by the GW and t he IW will both strengthen the enabling environment for investees to raise 
additional capital (either debt and equity) and thus provide a leveraging effect seeking to optimize  the efficiency 
of funds raised: e ach of the individual companies in which the Fund invests will have its own capital structure, 
with the Fund typically providing the equity portion (potentially with co -investors at the company level as well) 
and third- parties providing the debt.


---
*Page 48*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 44 OF 59 
   
 
 LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project /programme’s  logic al framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement 
Framework s under the Results Management Framework  to which the project/programme contributes  as a whole, including in 
respect of any  co-financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives  
Please select the appropriated expected result. For cross -cutting proposals, tick both.  
☐ Shift to low -emission sustainable development pathways  
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development  
  E.2. Core indicator targets  
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project/programme. Methodologies for the 
calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in section A.  
E.2.1. Expected ton nes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to be 
reduced or avoided ( mitigation  and 
cross -cutting  only)  Annual  Click here to enter text.  t CO 2 eq 
Lifetime  Click here to enter text.  t CO 2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, 
defined as total investment cost / 
expected lifetime emission 
reductions ( mitigation  and cross -
cutting only)  (a) Total project financing  USD 500m    Choose an item.     
(b) Requested GCF amount  USD 125m   Choose an item.  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  NA  t CO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t  CO 2eq (d = a / c)  NA   Choose an item.  / t CO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t  CO 2eq removed (e = b 
/ c) NA   Choose an item.  / t CO 2eq 
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of finance to 
be leveraged by the proposed 
project/programme as a result of the 
GFCR Fund ’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and private 
sources (mitigation  and cross -cutting 
only)  (f) Total finance leveraged  375m  +1% GP commitment    
USD  
(g) Public source co -finance d 125m  
(h) Private source finance leveraged  375m +1% GP commitment  
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b ) ____1:3 _   
(j) Public source co -financing ratio (j = g / b )  1:1  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b ) 1:3  
 
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex )  Direct  12737  
49% of female  
Indirect   35,236,406   
50% of female  
For a multi -country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and provide the data 
per country in annex 1 7. 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct   See Annex 17   
Indirect  See Annex 17  
For a multi -country proposal,  leave blank and  provide the data per country in annex 1 7.


---
*Page 49*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 45 OF 59 
   
 E.3. Fund -level impacts  
Select the appropriate impact(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select  key result areas and corresponding indicators 
from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected impact result. The 
result areas indicated in this section should match those selected in section A.4 above.  Add rows as needed.  
Expected Result s Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
A1.0 Increased resilience 
and enhanced livelihoods 
of the most vulnerable 
people, communities and 
regions   A1.2 Number of males 
and females benefiting 
from the adoption of diversified, climate resilient livelihood 
options (including 
fisheries, agriculture, 
tourism, etc.)   Employment data to 
be provided by 
investees. 
Templates and supporting material will be provided to 
facilitate data 
collection.  0 3,800 direct 
jobs created in 
sustainable 
businesses
57  12,700 direct 
jobs are created 
in sustainable 
businesses58 Investees are 
not exclusively 
capital -intensive 
businesses  
A4.0 Improved resilience 
of ecosystems and 
ecosystem services   A4.1 Coverage/scale 
of ecosystems 
protected and 
streng thened in 
response to climate variability and change  Data to be provided 
by investees. 
Templates and supporting material 
will be provided to 
facilitate data collection. 3rd party assessment when 
deemed necessary  Globally, 
approximately 
455,000ha of coral reefs are managed 
so as to prevent the 
removal of 
functional animal and plant groups (Mora et al., 2006; 
UNEP)
59  11,650ha will 
have significant 
increase in 
resilience in 
response to 
reductions in 
multiple 
stressors  29,000 ha by 
end of Fund 
period  will have 
significant 
increase in 
resilience in 
response to reductions in multiple 
stressors
60 Supportive 
policy 
environment for 
enforcement.  
There are 
economically 
viable private 
sector avenues 
that reduce 
pressures on 
reefs  
A4.0 Improved resilience 
of ecosystems and 
ecosystem services  A4.2 Value (US$) of 
ecosystem services generated or protected in response 
to climate change  Annual  Economic 
valuation study  Total economic 
value of ecosystem 
services implied by target area for 
resilient  coral reefs 
is $10bn
61  Identify 
portfolio of 
investments to enable 
maintenance of 
$10bn in coral 
reef ecosystem 
services  $10bn of coral 
reef ecosystem services 
maintained  Supportive policy 
environment for 
enforcement.  
There are 
economically 
viable private 
sector avenues 
that reduce 
pressures on 
reefs  
 
57 Mid-term targets assume that 30%  of the fund is spent by the mid -term. 
58 See Annex 23 for methodology  
59 Mora et al. 2006: 1.6% of coral reefs are managed so as to prevent the removal of functional animal and plant groups. UNEP: T he world ’s total reef area is 
284,803 km2. Sources: https:/ /www.researchgate.net/publication/6990589_Coral_Reefs_and_the_Global_Network_of_Marine_Protected_Areas and 
http://coral.unep.ch/Coral_Reefs.html  
60 See Annex 23 for detailed methodology  
61 Target area is 29,000 ha of coral reef ecosystems protected (see A4.1). Assumed Total Economic Value is assumed to be $352.24k/ha/year. Source: De 
Groot et al. 2017 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2012.07.005  E.4. Fund -level  outcomes  
Select the appropriate outcome(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select  key expected outcomes and corresponding 
indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected outcome.  
Add rows as needed.  
Expected Outcomes  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final


---
*Page 50*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46 OF 59 
   
   A7.0 Strengthened adaptive 
capacity and reduced exposure to 
climate risks  A7.1 Use by 
vulnerable 
households, 
communities, 
businesses and 
public -sector 
services of Fund-
supported tools 
instruments, 
strategies and 
activities to respond 
to climate change 
and variability   Survey of 
investee 
employees.  
Templates and 
supporting 
material will be 
provided to 
facilitate data 
collection .  
support from 
3rd party 
assessment 
(external 
consultants) 
where needed  
 To be determined 
during investment 
due diligence  Increase in 
proportion of 
household 
revenue of fund 
beneficiaries 
derived from 
sustainable 
activities  Majority of 
revenue in 
households of  
fund 
beneficiaries 
is derived 
from 
sustainable 
activities    
 
 
Investees pay fair 
and living wages 
to employees  
A8.0 Strengthened awareness of 
climate threats and risk -reduction 
processes  A8.1 Number of 
males and females 
made aware of 
climate threats and 
related appropriate 
responses   Data from  
investees 
regarding 
engagement   
with local 
communities  
and awareness-
raising activities 
related to 
climate change .  
3rd party  
(external 
consultants) 
where needed  0 At least one 
awareness -
related activity 
or campaign 
raising 
awareness of 
climate change 
and adaptation 
undertaken  by 
investees  Active 
involvement 
of the 
investee 
communities 
in adaptation 
and 
safeguarding 
of the 
surrounding 
environment   
Investees have 
the knowledge 
and capacity to 
meaningfully 
contribute to 
community- wide 
awareness and 
understandings of 
climate change


---
*Page 51*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47 OF 59 
   
  
62 Globally, 178m tonnes of seafood was produced from fisheries and aquaculture (FAO 2018). 14% of seafood production is produced sustainably (State of 
Sustainability Initiative, 2016). Sources: http://www.fao.org/state -of-fisheries -aquaculture  and https://w ww.iisd.org/publications/state- sustainability -initiatives -
review -standards -and-blue- econom y 
63 Sources: https://www.researchgate.ne t/publication/6990589_Coral_Reefs_and_the_Global_Network_of_Marine_Protected_Areas  and 
http://coral.unep.ch/Coral_Reefs.html  
64 Mid-term targets assume that 30% of the fund is spent by the mid -term. 
65 See Annex 23 for methodology  E.5. Project/programme  performance indicators  
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre -existing conditions, 
progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE reporti ng. Add rows as needed.  
Expected Results  Indicator  Means of 
Verification (MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
1. Increased 
production of 
food  from 
sustainable 
fisheries, 
mariculture, 
aquaculture 
and in reef -
connected 
communities.  Change in production 
of sustainable  fishery, 
mariculture and 
aquaculture  
businesses  Data from investees  on 
production capacit y, 
employees and T  sold; 
independent studies;  
support from 3rd party 
assessment ( external 
consultants ) where 
needed  Global sustainable 
seafood production 
in 2018 was 
approximately 25m 
T62. Country or 
region -specific data 
to be determined 
during investment 
due diligence and 
market study where 
investment will be 
established  By mid -term, a 
full portfolio of 
private sector 
companies 
producing 
sustainable 
seafood  is 
identified.  Increase in 
production 
capacity and 
production  for a ll 
sustainable 
fisheries, 
mariculture and 
aquaculture 
investees  The investment 
climate is open in 
target countries  
Fisheries can be 
sufficiently 
incentivized to 
transition to 
sustainable 
measures  
2. Increased 
protection and 
restoration 
coral reef 
ecosystems  Coverage of reefs 
ecosystems protected 
and strengthened in 
response to climate 
variability and change  
through protection, 
restoration, coral 
farming  and reduction 
in drivers of 
degradation  Data to be provided by 
investees. Templates 
and supporting material 
will be provided to 
facilitate data collection . 
3rd party assessment 
(external consultants) 
where needed  Approximately 
455,000ha of coral 
reefs are managed so 
as to prevent the 
removal of functional 
animal and plant 
groups (Mora et al., 
2006; UNEP) 63 Actively 
contribute to 
fund- level 
targets of 
8,700ha through 
protection, 
restoration , coral 
farming  and 
reduction in 
drivers of 
degradation   Actively 
contribute to 
fund level targets 
of 29,000ha 
through 
protection, 
restoration, coral 
farming and 
reduction in 
drivers of 
degradation   
 Supportive policy 
environment for 
enforcement  of 
sustainable 
practices .  
There are clear 
legal and 
regulatory 
signals for the 
maintenance of 
reef integrit y 
 
3. Growth in jobs 
and the local 
economy Number of direct jobs 
created in sustainable 
businesses  Employment data to be 
provided by investees. 
Templates and 
supporting material will 
be provided to facilitate 
data collection.  0 3,800 direct jobs 
created in 
sustainable 
businesses64  12,700 direct 
jobs are created 
in sustainable 
businesses65 Investees are not 
exclusively 
capital -intensive 
businesses  
4. Improved water 
quality  in reef 
ecosystems  Extent of pollution in 
reef areas measured 
on a scale of threat to 
the coral reef biome 
 Processing and 
treatment data  to be 
provided by investees. 
Templates and 
supporting material will 
be provided to facilitate 
data collection. 3rd party 
assessment (external 
consultants) where 
needed  To be determined 
during investment 
due diligence and 
market study where 
investment will be 
established  Significant 
improvement in 
pollution avoided 
in all reefs where 
infrastructure 
investments are 
made  measured 
against cubic 
metres of water 
treated ; T of 
plastic collected 
/ recycled ; T of 
agricultural 
nutrient runoff 
avoided  Pollution 
reduced to levels 
such that biome 
no longer 
threatened by 
local pollution  Infrastruct ure 
projects not only 
involve increased 
capacity but are 
accompanied by 
ongoing 
maintenance 
regimes  
 
5. Increased 
innovation to 
support Adoption of 
technology and 
innovations to Data to be provided by 
investees. Templates 
and supporting material Technological 
readiness  to be 
determined during Transfer of 
technology in the 
target geography Full adoption by 
local 
stakeholders of Transferred 
technologies  are 
appropriate


---
*Page 52*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48 OF 59 
   
  
66 Sources: https://www.iisd.org/publications/state -sustainability -initiatives -review -standards -and-blue-economy  and 
https://ebscosustainability.files.wordpress.com/2010/07/ecotourism.pdf   
67 GCF’s u nconditional  commitment at the first closing will increase to $50mm if the GFCR Fund procures at least $10mm of additional co- investment 
at the first close.  resilience of 
coral reefs and 
communities 
reliant on coral 
reefs   enhance  resilience 
within coral- reef 
dependent 
communities  will be provided to 
facilitate data collection. 
3rd party assessment 
(external consultants) 
where needed  investment due 
diligence   
Innovations 
developed in 
local 
communities 
achieve 
commercial 
viability  technologies and 
innovations 
related to 
restoration and 
protection of 
coral reefs  given the needs, 
skills and socio -
cultural contexts 
of the target 
community  
6. Increased 
market share of 
sustainable 
businesses in 
reef-dependent 
areas  Market share by 
country by type of 
business (ocean 
based production, 
tourism)  Sales and relevant local 
market data  to be 
provided by investees. 
Templates and 
supporting material will 
be provided to facilitate 
data collection. 3rd 
party assessment 
(external consultants) 
where needed  Global data available:  
Sustainable Seafood: 
14% of  seafood 
production (State of 
Sustainability 
Initiative , 2016)  
Ecotourism: 5 -7% of 
travel & tourism 
market (EBSCO, 
2009)66. 
Biome and  
community- specific 
data to be provided 
during investment 
pre-screening  Of total food 
production from 
the ocean in the 
local biome, an 
increased 
proportion is 
from sustainable 
sources  
 
Of total tourism 
activity in the 
local biome 
(hotels, 
recreation), an 
increased 
proportion is 
undertaken 
through 
sustainable 
businesses  
 Of total food 
production from 
the ocean in  the 
local biome, a  
majority is from 
sustainable  
sources  
 
Of total tourism 
activity in the 
local biome 
(hotels, 
recreation), a 
majority is 
underta ken 
through 
sustainable 
businesses  
 There are 
economically 
viable private 
sector avenues 
that reduce 
pressures on 
reefs  
 
E.6. Activities  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub -activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in the 
implementation timetable. Add rows as needed.  
Activity  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
E1.1: Procure legal services 
to prepare underlying 
documentation  Accredited Entity to engage 
fund counsel and local counsel as needed  Negotiate engagement letters  Legal engagement letters  
E1.2: Implement  structure 
for GFCR Fund and related entities
 Accredited Entity and legal 
service providers to work with GCF to implement  fund 
structure  Draft and revise documents; consult with external advisors  Final structure of the GFCR 
Fund and related entities is 
established  
E1.3: Draft formation 
documents and related 
Agreements for GFCR 
entities  Self-explanatory  Draft and revise documents  Final formation documents  
E1.4: Consummate Initial 
Closing of the GFCR Fund 
with GCF as anchor investor  GCF (via GCF Reef Holdings) 
executes and delivers a binding subscripti on 
agreement to the GFCR Fund for a $125mm 
commitment,  with $ 25mm 
of the commitment being 
unconditional67 Draft and revise documents  Initial Closing of the GFCR Fund


---
*Page 53*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49 OF 59 
   
 E2.1: Prepare fundraising 
material; evaluate GFCR 
Fund suitability  Materials may include 
overview presentations, team track record, pipeline, 
etc. Draft and revise materials; potential engagement of one or more placement agents  Marketing Plan and List of Priority Investors  
E2.2:  Draft Private 
Placement Memorandum and Other Marketing  
Materials.  Market Fund to other investors.  
 Self-explanatory  Draft and revise material; investor due diligence  Final Marketing Materials  
E2.3: Negotiate with 
potential investors and close on additional commitments to the GFCR 
Fund  Other LPs execute and  
deliver binding subscription agreements to the GFCR 
Fund Negotiate side letters with 
investors  Binding LP commitments  
E3.1: Early stage sourcing  Leverage networks and the 
Grant Window to generate 
deal flow   Evolving pipeline of potential transactions  
E3.2: Develop the pipeline  
Initial evaluation of pipeline opportunities  Evaluate against screening 
criteria; determine which opportunities to pursue in further 
detail  Identification of a smaller 
subset of potential transactions on which to 
conduct further due diligence  
E4.1: Perform Due Diligence 
on proposed deals  More comprehensive 
investigation into the 
potential opportunity.  Evaluate all aspects of potential 
investment; involve third -party 
experts/consultants as applicable  Identify transactions for investment by the GFCR Fund  
E4.2: Prepare 
documentation for 
Investment Committee  Self-explanatory  Obtain Investment Committee approval  Investment Committee 
Approval to make the 
proposed investment  
E4.3: Prepare 
documentation for AIFM 
and execute deals  Self-explanatory  Obtain AIFM approval  AIFM approval  
E5.1: Provide ad -hoc 
support to Portfolio 
Companies  Oversight and support via 
board representation and regular meetings with 
management  Monitor com pany performance  N/A 
E5.2: Perform regular 
evaluation of Portfolio 
Companies  Oversight and support via 
board representation and regular meetings with 
management  Monitor company performance  N/A 
E6.1: Collect information of 
investees, implement 
verification mechanisms, implement data collection 
tools  Self-explanatory  Monitor company performance  N/A 
E6.2: Organize annual audit 
of the GFCR Fund  Self-explanatory  Identify independent auditor; 
provide support as necessary  Annual audit report  
E6.3: Report to LPs on 
financial results, impacts and beneficiaries
 Self-explanatory  Prepare investment updates  Financial reports and 
qualitative updates  
E7.1: Evaluate exit 
opportunities  Identify potential acquirors  Engage investment banking 
services on an as -needed basis


---
*Page 54*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50 OF 59 
   
 E7.2: Negotiate sales 
transactions  Negotiate and execute 
purchase and sale 
agreement and other 
related documents  Engage investment banking and legal services on an as -needed 
basis  Negotiated exit transactions  
E7.3: Execute  Exit and 
Distribute Proceeds  N/A Satisfy closing conditions  Consummated exit 
transactions and distribution 
of proceeds  
E7.4: Liquidate the GFCR 
Fund after all Portfolio 
Companies have been fully 
disposed.  With assistance of legal 
counsel as necessary  Make liquidating distribution.  Dissolution of the GFCR Fund  
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Besides the arrangements (e.g. annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please give a summary of the project/programme 
specific arrangements for monitoring and evaluation. Please provide the types of interim and final evaluations. Describe 
Accredited Entity (AE) project reporting relationships, including to the NDA/Focal Point and between AE and Executing Entity (EE) 
as relevant, identifying reporting obligations from the EE to the AE. This should relate to the frequency of reporting on pro ject 
indicators, implementation challenges and financial status.  
 
Non -financial outputs of the f und are continuously monitored. The process is supervised by the ESMS Manager and includes the 
following activities:  
• Data collection and performance measurement:  
o By working closely with each investee, the data required to aggregate the non -financial fund metrics are obtained 
directly from the investees. This will include data to support the development of country or region- specific baselines 
aggregated investee bus iness plans  pertaining to  market share, sales, and economic activity in the sector/country . 
Additional data will be periodically and systematically aggregated during implementation relating to production , 
sales volumes  and value , human resources, infrastructure capacity and volumes of waste treated, among others.  
o Templates and supporting material help facilitate the data collection. An example of this material can be found in 
Annex 11B –  Template for Regular Investee Monitoring.  
o When appropriate and deemed necessary, external consultants may support the data collection and measurement 
process.  
• Performance assessment and corrective actions: Based on the predefined output and outcome targets and metrics, 
corrective actions may be defined by engaging with the investee.  
• Reporting: Output and outcome indicators are published annually. The report is made publicly available.  
 
The performance monitoring system will be gradually developed keeping in mind the activities under each strategic pillar. Dur ing 
the initial years of implementation period, the focus will be on implementation of the monitoring plan to track progress toward s 
outputs and outcomes, and evaluate the causal relationships among these levels to understand overall effectiveness of 
monitoring system. Periodic site visits by the Global GFCR team will further help assess intended outputs and outcomes in the 
real economy.  
 
Regarding the financial reporting, typically Pegasus provides financial information to its fund limited  partners on a quarterly basis 
along with a quarterly report that summarizes material developments at each  
portfolio company owned by the fund. Pegasus has established valuation processes and procedures in 
accordance with US GAAP and fair values for the underlying portfo lio investments are done in accordance  
with Accounting Standards Codification (ACS) 820 -10 on a semi -annual basis at June 30th and December  
31st.  Pegasus expects to engage a third -party valuation firm (which may also be the AIFM) to conduct the year -end v aluation.


---
*Page 55*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51 OF 59 
   
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max.  3 pages )  
Please describe financial, technical , operational , macroeconomic/political , money laundering /terrorist financing  (ML/TF) , 
sanctions, prohibited practices,  and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also 
describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  Insert additional rows if necessary.  
 
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability  
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact  
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as well as 
fraudulent, coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices  
Selected Risk Factor 1  Investee companies may fail to deliver on projected financial or impact results  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
 Pegasus seeks to conduct comprehensive due diligence on each potential investment, including the selection of local partners and others involved in the day- to-day management of the investee company.  Nevertheless, there are any number of reasons 
(some within Pegasus’ or management’s control and some not) why an investment may not perform as expected.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of ris k 
occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
Issues identified during due diligence may prompt Pegasus to alter transaction terms or impose conditions on the investment.  
Pegasus has also historically sought to stage its investments in many of its companies, which typically allows it to commit l ess 
capital to an investment upfront when the risk is potentially the greatest.  Pegasus also  remains closely involved with its 
investee companies, often by majority control of the board of directors and/or regular formal and informal communication with  
management.  Accordingly, when issues do arise at an investee company, Pegasus is apprised in r eal-time and often directly 
assists with identification and remediation of issues, including (in some instances) by dispatching Pegasus employees and/or 
operating/strategic advisors to the investee company.  
Selected Risk Factor 2  Private investors may not consider the GFCR Fund as sufficiently attractive for investment  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Medium  
Description  
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
 
Pegasus believes, adaptation impact funds are less well understood by investors.  There could be a perception that a fund 
focused on coral reefs is more philanthropic than commercial . 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of ris k 
occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
GCF’s concessional commitment provides significant downside protection for private investors.  Pegasus has had early stage 
conversations with certain investors to test the GFCR concept at a high level, and early indications are promising.  Pegasus is 
exploring other investment support mechanisms (e.g., third- party guarantees) to bolster the credit profile of the GFCR Fund.


---
*Page 56*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52 OF 59 
   
 Selected Risk Factor 3  ML/TF and Other Prohibited Practices  
Category  Probability  Impact  
ML/FT  Low Medium  
Description  
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
 
Potential  investees could engage in activities that violate GCF’s Policy on Prohibited Practices.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk 
occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
Pre-investment due diligence will include , among other things, extensive due diligence on operational matters of investee 
companies and the ide ntity/background of key personnel (i.e., KYC).  This due diligence will be supplemented by KYC 
requirements imposed on the Fund’s Depositary under Luxembourg law.


---
*Page 57*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53 OF 59 
   
 
 GCF POLICIES  AND STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max.  750 words, approximately  1.5 page s)  
Provide the environmental and social risk category assigned to the proposal as a result of screening and the rationale for 
assigning such category. Present also the environmental and social assessment and management instruments developed for the 
proposal (for example, ESIA, ESMP, ESMF, ESMS, environmental and social audits, etc .). Provide a summary of the main 
outcomes of these instruments. P resent the key environment al and social risks and impacts and the measures on how the 
project/programme will avoid, minimize and mitigate negative impacts at each stage (e.g. preparation, implementation and 
operation), in accordance with GCF’s ESS standards . If the proposed project or programme involves  investments through 
financial intermediations, describe the due diligence and management plans by the E xecuting Entities  (EEs)  and the oversight 
and supervision arrangements. Describe t he capacity of the EEs to implement the ESMP and ESMF and arrangements for 
compliance monitoring, supervision and reporting. I nclude a description of the project/programme- level grievance redress 
mechanism, a summary of the extent of multi -stakeholder consultations undertaken for the project/programme, the plan of the 
Accredited Entity  (AE) and EEs to continue to engage the stakeholders throughout project implementation, and the manner and 
timing of  disclosure of the applicable safeguards reports following the requirements of the GCF Information Disclosure Policy  
and Environmental and Social Policy.  
 
Describe any potential impacts on indigenous peoples and the measures to address these impacts including the development of  
an Indigenous Peoples Pl an and the process for meaningful consultation leading to free, prior and informed consent, pursuant to 
the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy .  
 Attach the appropriate assessment and management instruments or other applicable studies, depending on the environmental and social risk category as annex  6.  
 
As part of its commitment to sound E&S risk management, responsible operations and sustainable development, the GFCR Fund 
will operate an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) in conformity with the requirements and standards of 
Development Fin ance Institutions (DFIs) and in particular those of the Green Climate Fund and IFC Performance Standards. The 
GFCR Fund will aim to be certified compatible with the SDGs and reporting performance against project -specific impact criteria. 
The GFCR Fund will thus contribute to several Sustainable Development Goals (“SDGs”), in particular [ SDG 14 ‘Life Below Water’ , 
SDG 13, (Climate Action), SDG 6 (clean water and sanitation),  SDG 8 (job creation), SDG 11 (sustainable communities) and SDG 3 
(good health and well -being).]
68 
The GFCR Fund is committed to maintaining, implementing,  and continuously improving its ESMS to ensure implementation of 
this policy  throughout the value chain ( project identification, development, investment, monitoring and reporting) . The ESMS 
includes an E&S categorization system that is consistent with the equivalent practices of the GCG, the International Finance 
Corporation (IFC), the European Investment Bank (EIB) and other Development Finance Institutions (DFIs).  
The framework of the ESMS  includes the following elements:  
• E&S Policy  
• Procedures, which are fully integrated with the fund’s overall investment cycle  
o Transaction screening (incl. exclusion list)  
o Risk categorization  
o E&S due diligence  
• Tools  
• Guidance materials and reporting protocols  
 The full set of procedures that will be followed includes a process for screening of potential investments against the Exclus ion 
List prior to a Go/No Go decision, to ensure that no investment is made in projects or companies that are operating with excluded activities. The screening process permits the provisional categorization of proposed projects into higher, medium and lower r isk 
(Category A, B or C respectively) projects and that then determines the level of E&S due diligence required and the actions to be 
taken to minimize potential impacts.  
 
68 To be confirmed.


---
*Page 58*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 54 OF 59 
   
 The risk categories are aligned with the IFC risk categorization69: 
• Category A : Business activities with potential significant adverse environmental or social risks and/or impacts that are 
diverse, irreversible, or unprecedented.  
• Category B : Business activities with potential limited adverse environmental or social risks and/or impacts that are few 
in number, generally site -specific, largely reversible, and readily addressed through mitigati on measures.  
• Category C:  Business activities with minimal or no adverse environmental or social risks and/or impacts.  
Due to the strict environmental and social safeguards, GFCR will not invest in  Category A projects . Category projects  are excluded 
from th e Fund because projects shall  not, under any circumstances, result in significant adverse impacts that are multiple, 
irreversible, or unprecedented.  
All projects financed by the GFCR shall comply with host country regulatory requirements, the relevant IFC  Performance 
Standards and good industry practice, respectively the EHS Guidelines of the World Bank Group.  
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max.  500 words, approximately 1  page )  
Provide a summary of the gender assessment and project/programme -level gender action plan that is aligned with the 
objectives of GCF’s Gender Policy . Confirm a gender assessment and action plan exists describing the process used to develop 
both documents . Provide information on the key findings (who is vulnerable and why) and key recommendations (how to 
address the vulnerability identified) of the gender assessment . Indicate if stakeholder consultations have taken place and 
describe the key inputs integrat ed into  the action plan,  including:  how addressing the vulnerability will ensure equal 
participation and benefits from funds investment ; key gender -related results to be expected from the project /programme with 
targets; implementation arrangements that the AE has put in place to ensure activities are implemented and expected outcomes 
will be achieved, monitored and evaluated.  
 
Provide the full gender assessment and project -level gender action plan as annex 8 .  
 The GFCR Gender Assessment serves to understand how the fund can address gender vulnerabilities and design specific gender 
elements in the different project categories. A gender specific sector and peer -projects assessment has been conducted to 
identify the drivers of change and the gender dynamics needed to achieve the fund’s impact goals. The Gender Action Plan buil ds 
on the findings of the Gender Assessment and derives t arget outputs, outcomes and impacts and corresponding activities and 
indicators to ensure that GFCR meets its objectives.  
GFCR has assessed each project category beginning with gender -related vulnerabilities and capacities for change in in the sectors 
and projects. This includes the assessment of access to resources, power and decision -making, knowledge and perception of 
women, and participation in the community and society, among others.  
Based on the Gender Assessment, several vulnerabilities and capacit ies were identified in the focus areas of the GFCR and led to 
the conclusive impact objective to promote greater resilience and adaptive capacity of women and girls living in coral reef -
dependent communities through the attainment of three main impacts:  
• Empowerment of women and girls to promote independence and enable them to become agents of change;  
• Better health outcomes and improved physical and emotional safety of women and girls;  
• Sustainable livelihoods for women and girls.  
 
Based on the identified i mpacts, key activities, outcomes and outputs were derived. These include, among others:  
• Capacity and confidence building and skills training for women to promote entrepreneurship and business opportunities  
• Empower women in decision -making, politically and socially  
• Including women in the broader community and civil society organizations  
 
69 https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/topics_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/sustainability -at-ifc/policies -standards/es -
categorization


---
*Page 59*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 55 OF 59 
   
 • Promote decent work incl. equal pay, tackling sexual harassment and recruiting women into high -level employment  
• Address women specific needs during project design and develo pment through gender -responsive stakeholder 
consultation  
• Promote health outcomes and reduce gender violence  
Key gender -related indicators were developed for each of the impact objectives to measure the effectiveness of the approach. 
These include, among ot hers: 70 
• Empowerment of women and girls:  
o Percentage of women’s participation and leadership in community and at project level  
o Percentage of women making decisions on behalf of their families and communities  
o Number women with improved access to financial mechanisms  
• Better health outcomes and improved physical and emotional safety:  
o (Water borne) disease prevalence  
o Rates of childhood stunting  
o Measurable reduction in gender -based violence  
• Sustainable livelihoods  for women and girls:  
o Number of women employed  
o Percentage of gender pay gap  
o Percentage of contractual relationships (temporary vs. permanent and full -time vs. part -time)  
 
Indicators were also developed on process and project design level. Furthermore, the implementation of the GFCR Gender Policy 
and Gender Action Plan seek to ensure the effectiveness of the GFCR in regard to gender equality.  
Additionally, the GFCR has a monitoring framework and processes in place to measure gender equality results against an 
established baseline. This occurs at every stage of the project, from initial feasibility, project design, preliminary design  review, 
implementation and ongoing performance review. Monitoring is led by the ESMS Manager and external consultants if 
appropriate.  
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page ) 
Describe the project/programme’s financial management including  the financial monitoring systems,  financial accounting , 
auditing, and disbursement structure and methods . Refer to  section  B.4 on implementation arrangements as necessary.  
Articulate any procurement issues that may require attention, e.g.  procurement implementation arrangements and the role of 
the AE under the respective proposal, articulation of procurement risk assessment undertaken and how that will be managed by 
the AE or the implementing agency. P rovide a detailed procurement plan as annex  10.   
Pegasus maintains an Accounting Policy designed to ensure financial transactions are properly authorized, documented and 
executed.  Pegasus’ funds are audited by an independent auditor on an annual basis and Pegasus also undergoes a compliance 
audit conducted by a third- party compliance consultant on an annual basis. All disbursements are subject to a three -party 
process. One individual from below (other than the Chief Compliance Officer (“CCO”)) can create a wire; then any other 
authorized pers on who did not create the wire can/will approve that wire; finally only the CCO or Controller (under the 
direction of the CCO) are authorized to release the wire as long as such individual had not previously approved that same wir e.  
Each step of the proce ss is logged automatically in the firm’s online banking portal.   
• CCO – has the ability to review all activity of the bank accounts and generate reports. He/she also has the ability to 
approve and release wire transfers that have been entered into the webs ite with restrictions. He/she cannot release a 
wire that they have approved nor can he/she release a wire that they have modified.  
• Controller – has the ability to review all activity of the bank accounts and generate reports.  He/she also has the ability 
to create, approve and release wire transfers that have been entered into the website with restrictions. He/she cannot 
approve or release a wire that they have created nor can he/she release a wire that they have modified.  
 
70 Refer to the Gender Action Plan for additional gender indicators. The indicators listed here are exemplars.


---
*Page 60*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 56 OF 59 
   
 • Senior Accountant - has the abilit y to review all activity of the bank accounts and generate reports. He/she also has the 
ability to create wire and/or modify transfers on the bank’s website. Such an individual shall also have the ability to 
approve a wire which he/she did not create.  How ever, this person does not have the ability to release any wires.  
 
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that  the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure for all 
information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and programme funding 
proposals will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submi ssion to the Board, subject to the redaction of any 
information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in confidence is one of the exceptions, but t his 
exception should not be applied broadly to an entire document if the document contains specific, segregable portions that can 
be disclosed without prejudice or harm.   
 
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information.  
 
☐ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding pro posal, including its annexes, may not be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited entity is 
providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including al l annexes:  
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with an 
explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the accredited 
entity’s disclos ure policy , and  
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential information.


---
*Page 61*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 57 OF 59 
   
  
 ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory annexes   
☒ Annex 1  NDA no-objection letter(s)  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study , if applicable  
☒ Annex 3 Economic and /or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4 Detailed b udget  plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5 Implementation  timetable  including  key project/programme milestones  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):   
(ESS disclosu re form  provided)  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS ) 
☐ Others (please specify  – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, Indigenous 
People’ s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan , etc. ) 
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan  (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 1 0 Procurement plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 1 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 2 AE fee request (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 3 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☒ Annex  14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ Annex 1 5 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☒ Annex 1 6 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☒ Annex 1 7 Multi -country project/programme information (template provided)  
☐ Annex 1 8 Appraisal, d ue diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up -scaling or replicating a pilot project  
☐ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects financed 
by the entity  
☒ Annex 2 0 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☐ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☐ Annex 22  Blended Finance Funds  
 Annex 23  Potential impact on corals and beneficiaries  
 Annex 24  Risks and barriers  
 Annex 25  Sector Theories of Change


---
*Page 62*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 58 OF 59 
   
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents.


---
*Page 63*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 59 OF 59 
   
 
 
 Notice to Recipients  
This funding proposal (the “Proposal”) is for information purposes only and may not be reproduced or distributed under any 
circumstances without our prior written consent. This Proposal does not constitute an offer to sell, or solicitation of an offer to buy, 
any securities. Any offering will only be made pursuant to the relevant information within a private placement memorandum, li mited 
partnership agreement and subscription documents, al l of which must be read in their entirety. No offer to make an investment will be 
made prior to receipt by a potential investor of these documents and the completion of all the appropriate documents. Nothing  in this 
Proposal constitutes advice relating to legal, taxation, accounting, regulatory or investment matters and potential investors are advised 
to consult their own professional advisors in connection with making an investment decision.  
The distribution of this Proposal in certain jurisdictions may be restricted by law. This Proposal is only directed at persons to whom it 
may lawfully be distributed and any investment activity to which this Proposal relates will only be available to such persons . It is the 
responsibility of any potential investor to sa tisfy itself as to the full compliance with the applicable laws and regulations of any relevant 
jurisdiction, including obtaining any governmental or other consent and observing any other formality prescribed in such juri sdiction.  
Certain information conta ined herein has been obtained from published sources and third parties. While such information is believed 
to be reliable for the purpose used herein, none of Pegasus, its affiliates or any of its or their respective directors, offi cers, employees, 
advisor s, partners or agents has independently verified or assumes any responsibility for the accuracy of such information. Except 
where otherwise indicated herein, the information provided herein is based on matters as they exist as of the date of prepara tion, a nd 
may not be updated or otherwise revised to reflect information that subsequently becomes available, or circumstances existing or 
changes occurring after the date hereof.  This Proposal contains forward looking statements which are identifiable by words such as 
“anticipate”, “estimate”, “project”, “plan”, “intend”, “expect”, “believe”, “forecast” and similar expressions. The recipient  should be 
aware that these statements are estimates, reflecting only the judgment of Pegasus or company management, as app licable, and the 
recipient should not place any reliance on any forward looking statements. The analyses, forecasts and targets contained in t his 
Proposal are based on assumptions believed to be reasonable in light of the information presently available. S uch assumptions (and 
the resulting analyses, forecasts and targets) may require modification as additional information becomes available and as ec onomic 
and market developments warrant. Any such modification could be either favorable or adverse. The foreca sts and targets have been 
prepared and are set out for illustrative purposes only, and no assurances can be made that they will materialize.  
Pegasus and its directors, officers, employees, partners, affiliates, advisors and agents do not accept any responsibility whatsoever or 
liability for any direct, indirect or consequential loss or damage suffered or incurred by the recipient or any other person or entity, 
however incurred (including, but not limited to, negligence) in any way in connection with (i) the materials or any other written or oral 
information made available to the recipient or such other person or entity, including, without limitation, the information co ntained in 
this Proposal; (ii) any errors or omissions or the materials or any other writte n or oral information however caused; (iii) the recipient or 
any other person or entity having placed any reliance on the materials or such other information; or (iv) the reasonableness,  
authenticity, validity, adequacy, accuracy, completeness or reliabili ty of the materials or such other information. This Proposal does 
not constitute and should not be considered as any form of financial opinion or recommendation.  
Past or targeted performance should not be viewed as a guide to future performance. Actual res ults could differ materially from those 
discussed or implied herein, as a result of various factors, including future economic, competitive, political, regulatory or  market 
conditions of future business decisions. The value of an investment in products suc h as described herein may fall as well as rise and any 
investment carries the risk of a total loss of capital.  The value of an investment in products such as those described herei n may fall as 
well as rise and any investment carries the risk of a total lo ss of capital. An investment in such products is suitable only for 
sophisticated investors and requires the financial ability and willingness to accept the high risks and lack of liquidity inh erent in such an 
investment.  
Gross IRR is computed on an annual,  compounding basis, and is calculated before any carried interest, management fees and other 
partnership expenses, and is calculated using cash flows as they actually occur. Net IRR cannot be calculated for an individual 
investment without making arbitrary  assumptions about fees, expenses and carried interest.  
Nothing in this “Notice to Recipients” is intended to modify Pegasus’ obligations to the Green Climate Fund as set forth in t he 
Accreditation Master Agreement between Pegasus and the GCF.


---
*Page 64*
---

Page 60


---
*Page 65*
---

Page 61


---
*Page 66*
---

Page 62


---
*Page 67*
---

/1 /2 /3 /4 /2 /0 /3 /0 /5 /6 /7 /2 /7 □ /11 /5 /4 /3 /4 /12 /1 /13 □ /11 /14 /15 /16 /17 /15
/18 /17 /17 /19 /20 /21 /2 /2 /20 /22 /23 /24 /22 /25 /26 /27 /26 /28 /23 /15 /24 /29 /26 /30 /24 /31 /16 /2 /20 /22 /23 /2 /25 /26 /27 /17 /16 /26 /15 /33 /26 /16 /24 /19 /18 /19 /34 /15 /25 /15 /26 /35 /33 /26 /25 /36 /28 /22 /27 /17 /26 /37 /23 /28 /19 /16 /23 /28 /23 /16 /37 /38 /22 /31 /39 /15 /25 /15 /26 /37 /26 /16 /23 /29 /22 /28 /35 /15 /16 /30 /26 /16 /22 /37 /30 /23 /20 /36 /15 /32 /23 /40 /15 /16 /39 /23 /33 /37 /33 /26 /25 /36 /28 /22 /27 /17 /26 /35 /0 /3 /41 /42 /41 /41 /41 /5 /39 /23 /27 /43 /16 /44 /5 /2 /0
/45 /46 /47 /46 /48 /49 /50 /51 □ /53 /54 □ /54 /46 /47 /55 /47 /56 /57
/48 /58 /59 /60 /58 /61 /62 /60 /63 /62 /61 □ /64 /65 /60 □ /46 /66 /61 /58 /60 /66 /62 /61 /63 /65 /66 /62 /67 □ /55 /64 /64 /62 /63 /60 /68 □
/47 /62 /61 /63 /65 /66 /62 /67 □ /69 /58 /68 /63 /70 /66 /62 /61 /58 /71 □ /55 /72 /61 /73 /65 /60 /63 /61 /74 □ /64 /65 /60 □ /61 /73 /58 □ /75 /60 /58 /58 /66 □ /56 /67 /63 /76 /62 /61 /58 □ /54 /72 /66 /71
/57 /68 /77 /67 /62 /66 /62 /71 /62 □ /71 /65 /68 □ /45 /63 /66 /63 /68 /61 /78 /60 /63 /65 /68 /79 □ /80 /67 /65 /59 /65 □ /81 /79 □ /82 /83 □ /62 /66 /71 /62 /60 /79 □ /68 /62 /67 /62 □ /82 /84 /85
/56 /57 /86 □ /84 /87 /87 /85 /87 /88 /89 /87 /90 □ /88 □ /80 /60 /62 /68 /91 /67 /63 /62 /92 /69 /54 □ /88 □ /93 /90 /94 /95 □ /96 /87 /96 /87 /88 /85 /90 /97 /85 □ /88 □ /58 /88 /76 /62 /63 /67 □ /62 /66 /71 /98 /70 /59 /64 /99 /58 /59 /65 /66 /65 /76 /63 /62 /98 /70 /65 /100 /98 /101 /60
□ □ □
□
/56 /62 /60 /61 /62
□ /48 /57 /46 □ /66 /83 □ /94 /89 /87 /87 /92 /96 /87 /96 /94 /92 /45 /57
□ □
□
/45 /60 /98 □ /51 /62 /66 /66 /63 /59 /102 □ /75 /67 /58 /76 /62 /60 /58 /59
/69 /58 /77 /72 /61 /74 □ /57 /103 /58 /59 /72 /61 /63 /100 /58 □ /69 /63 /60 /58 /59 /61 /65 /60 □
/75 /60 /58 /58 /66 □ /56 /67 /63 /76 /62 /61 /58 □ /54 /72 /66 /71 □
/75 /88 /49 /65 /104 /58 /60 /79 □ /96 /85 /88 /85 □ /48 /65 /66 /70 /71 /65 /88 /71 /65 /66 /70 /79 □ /51 /58 /65 /66 /68 /72 /88 /70 /72 □
/46 /66 /59 /73 /58 /65 /66 □ /56 /63 /61 /74 /79 □ /50 /58 /77 /72 /101 /67 /63 /59 □ /65 /64 □ /81 /65 /60 /58 /62
□
/50 /58 /105 □ /106 /107 /108 /109 /110 /108 /111 □ /113 /114 /115 /113 /115 /116 /117 /118 □ /119 /115 /114 □ /120 /121 /122 □ /123 /124 /106 □ /125 /126 □ /127 /124 /128 □ /114 /122 /111 /117 /114 /109 /110 /108 /111 □ /120 /121 /122 □ /113 /114 /115 /111 /114 /117 /129 □ /130 /123 /118 /115 /125 /117 /118 □ /106 /107 /108 /109 □ /119 /115 /114 □ /124 /115 /114 /117 /118 □ /131 /122 /122 /119 /116 /130
/132 /133 /134 /133 /135 /136 /137 /138 /139 /140 /141 □ /46 /64 □ /74 /65 /72 □ /62 /66 /68 /104 /58 /60 □ /61 /73 /63 /68 □ /67 /58 /61 /61 /58 /60 /79 □ /77 /67 /58 /62 /68 /58 □ /63 /66 /71 /63 /59 /62 /61 /58 □ /61 /73 /58 □ /86 /60 /65 /59 /58 /68 /68 □ /66 /98 /83 □ /94 /96 /94 /96 /87 /98 /94 /87 /87 /96 /142 /85 /92 /96 /87 /96 /94 /88 /94 /87
□
/69 /58 /62 /60 □ /45 /60 /98 □ /75 /67 /58 /76 /62 /60 /58 /59 /79
□
/94 /98 /143 /58 □ /60 /58 /64 /58 /60 □ /61 /65 □ /61 /73 /58 □ /77 /60 /65 /70 /60 /62 /76 /76 /58 □ /58 /66 /61 /63 /61 /67 /58 /71 □ /144 /123 /118 /115 /125 /117 /118 □ /106 /107 /108 /109 □ /119 /115 /114 □ /124 /115 /114 /117 /118 □ /131 /122 /122 /119 /116 /144 □ /62 /68 □ /63 /66 /59 /67 /72 /71 /58 /71 □ /63 /66 □ /61 /73 /58
/64 /72 /66 /71 /63 /66 /70 □ /77 /60 /65 /77 /65 /68 /62 /67 □ /68 /72 /101 /76 /63 /61 /61 /58 /71 □ /101 /74 □ /86 /56 /55 □ /61 /65 □ /72 /68 □ /65 /66 □ /45 /62 /74 □ /94 /87/61 /73/79 □ /96 /87 /96 /94 /98
/96 /98 /49 /73 /58
□ /72 /66 /71 /58 /60 /68 /63 /70 /66 /58 /71 □ /63 /68 □ /61 /73 /58 □ /71 /72 /67 /74 □ /62 /72 /61 /73 /65 /60 /63 /145 /58 /71 □ /60 /58 /77 /60 /58 /68 /58 /66 /61 /62 /61 /63 /100 /58 □ /65 /64 □ /61 /73 /58 □ /48 /58 /59 /60 /58 /61 /62 /60 /63 /62 /61 □ /64 /65 /60 □ /46 /66 /61 /58 /60 /66 /62 /61 /63 /65 /66 /62 /67
/57 /59 /65 /66 /65 /76 /63 /59 □ /55 /64 /64 /62 /63 /60 /68 /79 □ /45 /63 /66 /63 /68 /61 /60 /74 □ /65 /64 □ /57 /59 /65 /66 /65 /76 /74 /79 □ /61 /73 /58 □ /47 /62 /61 /63 /65 /66 /62 /67 □ /69 /58 /68 /63 /70 /66 /62 /61 /58 /71 □ /55 /72 /61 /73 /65 /60 /63 /61 /74 □ /64 /65 /60 □ /80 /60 /62 /145 /63 /67 /98
/142 /98 /86 /72 /60 /68 /72 /62 /66 /61 □ /61 /65 □ /75 /56 /54 □ /71 /58 /59 /63 /68 /63 /65 /66 □ /80 /98 /87 /82 /92 /94 /87 /79 □ /61 /73 /58 □ /59 /65 /66 /61 /58 /66 /61 □ /65 /64 □ /104 /73 /63 /59 /73 □ /104 /58 □ /62 /59 /102 /66 /65 /104 /67 /58 /71 /70 /58 □ /61 /65 □ /73 /62 /100 /58 □ /60 /58 /100 /63 /58 /104 /58 /71 /79
/104 /58 □ /73 /58 /60 /58 /101 /74 □ /59 /65 /76 /76 /72 /66 /63 /59 /62 /61 /58 □ /65 /72 /60 □ /66 /65 /88 /65 /101 /146 /58 /59 /61 /63 /65 /66 □ /61 /65 □ /61 /73 /58 □ /77 /60 /65 /70 /60 /62 /76 /76 /58 □ /62 /68 □ /63 /66 /59 /67 /72 /71 /58 /71 □ /63 /66 □ /61 /73 /58 □ /64 /72 /66 /71 /63 /66 /70 □ /77 /60 /65 /77 /65 /68 /62 /67 /98
/85 /98 /80 /74 □ /59 /65 /76 /76 /72 /66 /63 /59 /62 /61 /63 /66 /70 □ /65 /72 /60 □ /66 /65 /88 /65 /101 /146 /58 /59 /61 /63 /65 /66 /79 □ /63 /61 □ /63 /68 □ /63 /76 /77 /67 /63 /58 /71 □ /61 /73 /62 /61 /105
/62 /95 /49 /73 /58 □ /70 /65 /100 /58 /60 /66 /76 /58 /66 /61 □ /65 /64 □ /80 /60 /62 /145 /63 /67 □ /73 /62 /68 □ /66 /65 /88 /65 /101 /146 /58 /59 /61 /63 /65 /66 □ /61 /65 □ /61 /73 /58 □ /77 /60 /65 /70 /60 /62 /76 /76 /58 □ /62 /68 □ /63 /66 /59 /67 /72 /71 /58 /71 □ /63 /66 □ /61 /73 /58 □ /64 /72 /66 /71 /63 /66 /70
/77 /60 /65 /77 /65 /68 /62 /67 /147
/101 /95 /49 /73 /58 □ /77 /60 /65 /70 /60 /62 /76 /76 /58 □ /62 /68 □ /63 /66 /59 /67 /72 /71 /58 /71 □ /63 /66 □ /61 /73 /58 □ /64 /72 /66 /71 /63 /66 /70 □ /77 /60 /65 /77 /65 /68 /62 /67 □ /63 /68 □ /63 /66 □ /59 /65 /66 /64 /65 /60 /76 /63 /61 /74 □ /104 /63 /61 /73 □ /61 /73 /58 □ /66 /62 /61 /63 /65 /66 /62 /67
/77 /60 /63 /65 /60 /63 /61 /63 /58 /68 /79 □ /68 /61 /60 /62 /61 /58 /70 /63 /58 /68 □ /62 /66 /71 □ /77 /67 /62 /66 /68 □ /65 /64 □ /80 /60 /62 /145 /63 /67 /147 □ /62 /66 /71
/59 /95 /46 /66 □ /62 /59 /59 /65 /60 /71 /62 /66 /59 /58 □ /104 /63 /61 /73 □ /61 /73 /58 □ /75 /56 /54 /148 /68 □ /58 /66 /100 /63 /60 /65 /66 /76 /58 /66 /61 /62 /67 □ /62 /66 /71 □ /68 /65 /59 /63 /62 /67 □ /68 /62 /64 /58 /70 /72 /62 /60 /71 /68 /79 □ /61 /73 /58 □ /77 /60 /65 /70 /60 /62 /76 /76 /58 □ /62 /68
/63 /66 /59 /67 /72 /71 /58 /71 □ /63 /66 □ /61 /73 /58 □ /64 /72 /66 /71 /63 /66 /70 □ /77 /60 /65 /77 /65 /68 /62 /67 □ /63 /68 □ /63 /66 □ /59 /65 /66 /64 /65 /60 /76 /63 /61 /74 □ /104 /63 /61 /73 □ /60 /58 /67 /58 /100 /62 /66 /61 □ /66 /62 /61 /63 /65 /66 /62 /67 □ /67 /62 /104 /68 □ /62 /66 /71 □ /60 /58 /70 /72 /67 /62 /61 /63 /65 /66 /68 /98
/97 /98 /143 /58 □ /62 /67 /68 /65 □ /59 /65 /66 /64 /63 /60 /76 □ /61 /73 /62 /61 □ /65 /72 /60 □ /66 /62 /61 /63 /65 /66 /62 /67 □ /77 /60 /65 /59 /58 /68 /68 □ /64 /65 /60 □ /62 /68 /59 /58 /60 /61 /62 /63 /66 /63 /66 /70 □ /66 /65 /88 /65 /101 /146 /58 /59 /61 /63 /65 /66 □ /61 /65 □ /61 /73 /58 □ /77 /60 /65 /70 /60 /62 /76 /76 /58 /79 □ /62 /68
/63 /66 /59 /67 /72 /71 /58 /71 □ /63 /66 □ /61 /73 /58 □ /64 /72 /66 /71 /63 /66 /70 □ /77 /60 /65 /77 /65 /68 /62 /67 /79 □ /73 /62 /68 □ /101 /58 /58 /66 □ /71 /72 /67 /74 □ /64 /65 /67 /67 /65 /104 /58 /71 /98 □
/90 /98 /143 /58 □ /62 /67 /68 /65 □ /59 /65 /66 /64 /63 /60 /76 □ /61 /73 /62 /61 □ /65 /72 /60 □ /66 /65 /88 /65 /101 /146 /58 /59 /61 /63 /65 /66 □ /62 /77 /77 /67 /63 /58 /68 □ /61 /65 □ /62 /67 /67 □ /77 /60 /65 /146 /58 /59 /61 /68 □ /65 /60 □ /62 /59 /61 /63 /100 /63 /61 /63 /58 /68 □ /61 /65 □ /101 /58 □ /63 /76 /77 /67 /58 /76 /58 /66 /61 /58 /71
/104 /63 /61 /73 /63 /66 □ /61 /73 /58 □ /68 /59 /65 /77 /58 □ /65 /64 □ /61 /73 /58 □ /77 /60 /65 /70 /60 /62 /76 /76 /58 /98
/84 /98 /143 /58 □ /62 /59 /102 /66 /65 /104 /67 /58 /71 /70 /58 □ /61 /73 /62 /61 □ /61 /73 /63 /68 □ /67 /58 /61 /61 /58 /60 □ /104 /63 /67 /67 □ /101 /58 □ /76 /62 /71 /58 □ /77 /72 /101 /67 /63 /59 /67 /74 □ /62 /100 /62 /63 /67 /62 /101 /67 /58 □ /65 /66 □ /61 /73 /58 □ /75 /56 /54 □ /104 /58 /101 /68 /63 /61 /58 /98
□
/81 /63 /66 /71 □ /60 /58 /70 /62 /60 /71 /68 /79
□
Page 63


---
*Page 68*
---

/1 /2 /3 /4 /2 /0 /3 /0 /5 /6 /7 /2 /7 □ /11 /5 /4 /3 /4 /12 /1 /13 □ /11 /14 /15 /16 /17 /15
/18 /17 /17 /19 /20 /21 /2 /2 /20 /22 /23 /24 /22 /25 /26 /27 /26 /28 /23 /15 /24 /29 /26 /30 /24 /31 /16 /2 /20 /22 /23 /2 /25 /26 /27 /17 /16 /26 /32 /15 /33 /26 /16 /24 /19 /18 /19 /34 /15 /25 /15 /26 /35 /33 /26 /25 /36 /28 /22 /27 /17 /26 /37 /23 /28 /19 /16 /23 /28 /23 /16 /37 /38 /22 /31 /39 /15 /25 /15 /26 /37 /26 /16 /23 /29 /22 /28 /35 /15 /16 /30 /26 /16 /22 /37 /30 /23 /20 /36 /15 /32 /23 /40 /15 /16 /39 /23 /33 /37 /33 /26 /25 /36 /28 /22 /27 /17 /26 /35 /0 /3 /41 /42 /41 /41 /41 /5 /39 /23 /27 /43 /16 /44 /2/45 /46 /47 /48 /49 /50 /51 /52 /46 □ /54 /55 /55 /56 /51 /54 /57 /46 □ /50 /58 /50 /52 /59 /46 /51 /56 /47 /54 /49 /50 /51 /52 /50
/60 /61 /62 /63 /64 /65 /45 /66 □ /64 /65 /67 /61 /60 /45 /66 □ /68 /66 /69 /60 /70
/70 /50 /47 /59 /50
/52 /54 /59 /71 □ /72 /46 /59 □ /62 /51 /52 /50 /59 /51 /54 /52 /56 /46 /51 /54 /58 □ /60 /47 /46 /51 /46 /49 /56 /47 □ /64 /72 /72 /54 /56 /59 /55
/69 /56 /51 /56 /55 /52 /59 /71 □ /46 /72 □ /60 /47 /46 /51 /46 /49 /71 □ /46 /72 □ /73 /59 /54 /74 /56 /58
□
/75 /76 /77 /78 /79 /80 /81 /82 /76 □ /84 /85 /85 /86 /81 /84 /87 /76 □ /80 /88 /80 /82 /89 /76 /81 /86 /77 /84 /79 /80 /81 /82 /80 □ /90 /76 /89 □ /91 /92 /93 /94 /95 /96 /97 /98 □ /100 /96 /101 /92 /102 /97 /98 □ /103 /98 /104 /102 /105 /106 □ /107 /102 /108 /92 /102 /109 /110 /92 /93 /98 /111 /95 /112 □ /97 /102 □ /100 /105 /105 /113 /114 /109 /98 /105
/91 /108 /98 /114 /115 /104 /93 /108 /98 /105 □ /116 /114 /109 /102 /92 /114 /95 /108 /93 /98 /114 /95 /93 /105 /106 □ /80 /79 □ /117 /118 /119 /120 /121 /119 /117 /120 /117 /122 /106 □ /123 /85 □ /122 /121 /124 /125 /120 /106 □ /77 /76 /81 /126 /76 /89 /79 /80 □ /127 /76 /89 /128 /89 /86 /76 □ /76 /129 /77 /86 /84 /88 □ /87 /80 □ /130 /89 /84 /85 /131 /88 /86 /84 /106 □ /77 /76 /79
/126 /78 /81 /87 /84 /79 /80 /81 /82 /76 □ /81 /76 □ /132 □ /118 /133 □ /87 /76 □ /84 /89 /82 /134 □ /135 /133 □ /87 /76 □ /75 /80 /77 /89 /80 /82 /76 □ /81 /133 □ /122 /120 /134 /125 /135 /118 /106 □ /87 /80 □ /122 /118 □ /87 /80 □ /81 /76 /136 /80 /79 /137 /89 /76 □ /87 /80 □ /117 /120 /117 /120 /134
/138 □ /84 /78 /82 /80 /81 /139 /77 /86 /87 /84 /87 /80 □ /87 /80 /85 /82 /80 □ /87 /76 /77 /78 /79 /80 /81 /82 /76 □ /90 /76 /87 /80 □ /85 /80 /89 □ /77 /76 /81 /126 /80 /89 /86 /87 /84 □ /81 /76 □ /85 /86 /82 /80
/127 /140 /90 /85 /124 /119 /119 /85 /80 /86 /134 /80 /77 /76 /81 /76 /79 /86 /84 /134 /141 /76 /136 /134 /137 /89 /119 /85 /80 /86 /119 /77 /76 /81 /82 /89 /76 /88 /84 /87 /76 /89 /142 /80 /143 /82 /80 /89 /81 /76 /134 /90 /127 /90 /144
/84 /77 /84 /76 /145 /87 /76 /77 /78 /79 /80 /81 /82 /76 /142 /77 /76 /81 /126 /80 /89 /86 /89 /146 /86 /87 /142 /76 /89 /141 /84 /76 /142 /84 /77 /80 /85 /85 /76 /142 /80 /143 /82 /80 /89 /81 /76 /145 /120 /106 □ /86 /81 /126 /76 /89 /79 /84 /81 /87 /76 □ /76 □ /77 /147 /87 /86 /141 /76 □ /136 /80 /89 /86 /129 /77 /84 /87 /76 /89 □ /148 /149 /150 /149 /151 /151 /152 /153
/80 □ /76 □ /77
/147 /87 /86 /141 /76 □ /154 /155 /154 □ /156 /157 /158 /159 /156 /150 /150 /148 /134
/160 /59 /46 /47 /50 /55 /55 /46 □ /51 /161 □ /162 /163 /162 /163 /164 /165 /162 /164 /164 /163 /166 /167 /168 /163 /164 /163 /162 /169 /162 /164 /165 /70 /60 /62 □ /51 /161 □ /162 /170 /164 /170 /171 /171 /167 /172
Page 64


---
*Page 69*
---

Bogotá D.C., viernes, 03 de septiembre de 2021 *20214500924981*
Al responder cite este Nro. 
DADS  20214500924981  
The Green Climate Fund-GCF 
Att. executive-office@gcfund.org  
Subject: Funding proposal for the GCF by Pegasus Capital Advisors, L.P. – regarding the 
programme The Global Fund for Coral Reefs (GFCR) 
Dear Madam, Sir, 
We refer to the multi-region programme titled  Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment 
Window  (GFCR)  in Colombia as included in the funding proposal submitted by Pegasus 
Capital Advisors, L.P. to us on May the 10th 2021.  
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the National Planning Department 
of Colombia. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, 
we hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding 
proposal. 
By communicating our no- objection, it is implied that: 
(a) The government of Colombia has no-objection to the programme as included in the
funding proposal;
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national
priorities, has the support of the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable
Development (Letter attached) , this considering that the programme is aligned with
the National Climate Changes policies, strategies and plans of Colombia;
(c) Given that the allocation for the Government of Colombia is given at the level of a
financing range, it is necessary to work with Pegasus Capital Advisors, L.P,
Accredited Entity, in order to identify the specific areas of intervention, initiatives to
be financed, define the main stakeholders, and the governance framework for the
implementation.
(d)In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme
as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no -objection to the programme 
as included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.  
Page 65


---
*Page 70*
---

We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented 
within the scope of the programme 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Kind regards, 
SANTIAGO APARICIO V. 
Director of Environment and Sustainable Development 
National Planning Department 
Colombia 
CC cpolycarp@gcfund.org ; ccasallas@dnp.gov.co ; npreciado@dnp.gov.co ; cnuttall@regions20.org ; 
BFriedman@pcalp.com ; sylvain.taboni@bnpparibas.com ; pierre.bardoux@undp.org ; 
Moritz.de.Chaisemartin@systemiq.earth  
Prepared: Néstor Darío Preciado 
Revised:  Carlos Eduardo Casallas, Juan Sebastián Rivera 
Page 66


---
*Page 71*
---

Page 67


---
*Page 72*
---

Page 68


---
*Page 73*
---

|
Dirección: Calle Madrid 1159 y Andalucía
Código Postal: 170525 / Quito - Ecuador ● Teléfono: (593 2) 398-7600
www.ambiente.gob.ec
Oficio Nro. MAAE-SCC-2021-0257-0
Quito, D.M., 03 de septiembre de 2021
Asunto: Funding Proposal for the GCF by Pegasus Capital Advisors LP regarding the
initiative "Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window"
Señor
Yannick Glemarec
Executive Director
GREEN CLIMATE FUND
En su Despacho 
The following is in reference to the initiative titled “Global Fund for Coral Reefs
Investment Window” in Ecuador, as included in the funding proposal submitted by
Pegasus Capital Advisors LP to us on July 2021. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Environment,
Water and Ecological Transition of Ecuador, which acts as National Designated 
Authority. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have
reviewed, we hereby communicate our No-Objection to the initiative as included in the
funding proposal. 
By communicating our No-Objection, it is implied that: 
1.The initiative as included in the funding proposal was shared with the Government
of Ecuador.
As National Designated Authority, we underline that our national process for ascertaining
no-objection to the initiative, as included in the funding proposal, has been followed. 
Pegasus Capital Advisors has developed this project as part of their pipeline, thereby we
would like to be part of this program as we can envision opportunities to work with the
Coral Reef Fund. However, the information in regard to proposed interventions must
consider our country’s needs and the involvement of national institutions as part of the
decision-making committee in order to ensure that the Fund would invest in our country’s
climate priorities. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Kind regards, 
1/2
* Documento firmado electrónicamente por Quipux 
Page 69


---
*Page 74*
---

|
Dirección: Calle Madrid 1159 y Andalucía
Código Postal: 170525 / Quito - Ecuador ● Teléfono: (593 2) 398-7600
www.ambiente.gob.ec
Oficio Nro. MAAE-SCC-2021-0257-0
Quito, D.M., 03 de septiembre de 2021
Atentamente, 
Documento firmado electrónicamente
Mgs. Karina Maribel Barrera Moncayo
SUBSECRETARIA DE CAMBIO CLIMÁTICO
Copia: 
Señora Magíster
Inés Patricia Arias Machado
Directora de Adaptación al Cambio Climático
Señora Secretaria
Teresa Del Pilar Pérez Toscano
Secretaria de la Subsecretaria
Señorita Ingeniera
Gabriela Jeanneth Vargas Luna
Especialista de Políticas de Cambio Climático 3
ab/gv
2/2
* Documento firmado electrónicamente por Quipux 
Page 70


---
*Page 75*
---

Page 71


---
*Page 76*
---

Page 72


---
*Page 77*
---

Page 73


---
*Page 78*
---

MINISTRY OF FINANCE OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
FISCAL POLICY AGENCY
GEDUNG R.M. NOTOHAMIPRODJO LANTAI 2, JALAN DR. WAHIDIN NOMOR I, JAKARTA 10710
TELEPON (021) 3441484; FAKSIMILE (021) 3848049; LAMAN FISKAL.KEMENKEU.GO.ID
Ref :S-115/KF/2021 01 October 2021
Sifat :Sangat Segera
Lampiran :satu berkas
Yth. Mr. Yannick Glemarec Executive Director Green Climate Fund Songdo Business District  Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 
22004 Republic of Korea
Mr. Yannick Glemarec
Executive Director, Green Climate Fund
Songdo Business District,
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 22004
Republic of Korea
Subject :Funding Proposals for the GCF by Pegasus Capital Advisors regarding the 
Global Fund for Coral Reefs (GFCR) Investment Window
Dear Mr. Glemarec,
Werefer totheProgramme ofGlobal Fund forCoral Reefs (GFCR) Investment Window as
included intheFunding Proposal submitted byPegasus Capital Advisors touson24thJune 2021
(the “Programme”).
Theundersigned istheduly authorized representative ofFiscal Policy Agency, Ministry ofFinance
of Indonesia, the National Designated Authority of Indonesia.
Pursuant toGCF decision B.08/10, thecontent ofwhich weacknowledge tohave reviewed, we
hereby communicate our no-objection to the Programme as included in the Funding Proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a)The government ofIndonesia has no-objection totheProgramme asincluded inthe
Funding Proposal;
(b)The Programme asincluded intheFunding Proposal isinconformity with Indonesia ’s
national priorities, strategies and plans;
(c)Inaccordance with theGCF’s environmental and social safeguards, theProgramme as
included intheFunding Proposal isinconformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
Wealso confirm that ournational process forascertaining no-objection totheProgramme as
included in the Funding Proposal has been duly followed.
Wealso confirm thatourno-objection applies toallprojects oractivities tobeimplemented within
the scope of the Programme.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Yours faithfully,
Kepala Badan Kebijakan Fiskal
Ditandatangani secara elektronik
Febrio Nathan Kacaribu
Cc:
Director of Center for Climate Finance and Multilateral Policy
Page 74


---
*Page 79*
---

 
 
 
 
 
August  30, 2021  
Mr. Yannic Glemarec 
Executive Director  
Green Climate Fund  
Korea  
Re: Support for the “Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investmen t Window ” 
Dear Mr. Glemarec : 
We refer to the programme titled “ Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investmen t Window ” in 
Jamaica as included in the funding proposal submitted by Pegasus Capital Advisors, L.P. to us on 
27 August 2021.  
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Housing, Urban 
Renewal, Environment and Climate Change, t he National Designated Authority of Jamaica.  
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we 
hereby communicate our no -objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal.  
By communicating our no -object ion, it is implied that:  
(a)The government of Jamaica has no -objection to the programme as included in the
funding proposal;
(b)The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national
priorities, strategies and plans of Jamaica;
(c)In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme as
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no -objection to the pro gramme as 
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.  
We also confirm that our no -objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented 
within the scope of the programme . 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly avail able on the GCF website.  
Sincerely , 
UnaMay Gordon(Ms.)  
Principal Director,  
Climate Change Division  ANY REPLY OR SUBSEQUENT 
REFERENCE SHOULD BE ADDRESSED 
TO THE PERMANENT SECRETARY  
AND THE FOLLOWING REFERENCE 
NUMBER QUOTED:  
Tel:Number:876 -926-1690-3  
926-1590-9 FAX 754 -0975
fax 876-754-0975MINISTRY OF  HOUSING, URBAN RENEWAL, ENVIRONMENT 
AND CLIMATE CHANGE  
25 DOMINICA DRIVE  
KINGSTON 5  
JAMAICA  
Page 75


---
*Page 80*
---

Page 76


---
*Page 81*
---

Av. Insurgentes  Sur No.  1971,  Torre  III, Piso  7, Colonia  Guadalupe  Inn, Alcaldía  Álvaro  Obregón,  Ciudad  de México,  CP. 01020.  
Tel. +52 55 3688  1410  www.gob.mx/shcp  Subsecretaría de Hacienda  y 
 Crédito  Público  
Unidad  de Crédito  Público  
To: The Green Climate Fund (“GCF”)  
Mexico City, September 2nd , 2021
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Pegasus Capital Advisors regarding the Global 
Fund for  Coral  Reefs  Investment  Window  
Dear Madam, Sir,  
We refer  to the programm e titled Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window  as 
included in the funding proposal submitted by Pegasus Capital Advisors to us on 15 July 
2021.  
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Brenda Pequeño Vargas, the 
National Designated Authority of Mexico.  
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have 
reviewed, we hereby communicate our no -objection to the programm e as included in 
the funding proposal.  
By communicating our no -objection, it is implied that:  
(a)The government of Mexico has no -objection to the programm e as included in the
funding proposal;
(b)The programm e as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the
national priorities, strategies and plans of Mexico;
(c)In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the
programm e as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant
national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no -objection to the 
programm e as included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.  
We also confirm that our no -objection applies to all projects  or activities to be 
implemented within the sc ope of the programm e. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.  
 Kind  regards,  
Brenda  Pequ eño Vargas  
Director  General  
National  Designated  Authority  
Mexico  
Page 77


---
*Page 82*
---

Page 78


---
*Page 83*
---

Page 79


---
*Page 84*
---

MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE , CLIMATE CHANGE  AND ENVIRONMENT  
CLIMATE CHANGE  AND ENERGY  DEPARTMENT  
Office of the Principal Secretary  
Botanical Gardens, Mont Fleuri ,  P.O. Box 445, Victoria, Mahe, Republic of Seychelles  
Tel. No. (+248) 4670568  Email: rloustaulalanne@statehouse.gov.sc  
Please address all correspondence to the Principal Secretary – Ms Rebecca Loustau -Lalanne 
DATE:  15th June , 202 1 
Yannick Glemarec,  
Executive Director  
Songdo Business District  
175 Art Center -daero  
Yeonsu -gu, Incheon 2200  
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Pegasus Capital Advisor 
      regarding “Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window”  
Dear Sir, 
We refer to the programme titled “Global Fund for Coral Reefs 
Investment Window”  in Seychelles as included in the funding proposal 
submitted by Pegasus Capital Advisor to us on 10th May, 2021  
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of National 
Designated Authority of Seychelles . 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge 
to have reviewed, we hereby communicate our no -objection to the 
programme as included in the funding proposal.  
By communicating our no -objection, it is implied that:  
(a) The governmen t of Seychelles  has no -objection to the programme
as included in the funding proposal;
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in
conformity with the national priorities, strategies and plans of
Seychelles ;
Page 80


---
*Page 85*
---

(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social
safeguards, the programme as included in the funding proposal
is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no -objection to 
the programme as  included in the funding proposal has been duly 
followed.  
We also confirm that our no -objection applies to all projects or activities to 
be implemented within the scope of the programme  
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on t he GCF 
website.  
Yours sincerely , 
Wills Agricole  
Technical Advisor for Climate Change  and Energy  
National Designated Authority of Seychelles  
For: PRINCIPAL SECRETARY/ CLIMATE CHANGE  & ENERGY 
Page 81


---
*Page 86*
---

Page 82


---
*Page 87*
---

_,.. 
REPUBLICA DE PANAMA 
-GOBIERNO NACIONAL -MINISTERIO DE 
AMBIENTE 
Panama, 25 de agosto de 2021 
DM-1571-2021 
Sefior 
Y ANNICK GLEMAREC 
Director Ejecutivo 
El Fondo Verde para el Clima (FVC) 
En su despacho 
Estimado Sefior Glemarec: 
Nos referimos al programa denominado Fondo Global para Arrecifes de Coral (GFCR) en la 
Republica de Panama, como se incluye en la propuesta de financiamiento que nos present6 Pegasus 
Capital el 14 de julio de 2021. 
El abajo firmante es el representante debidamente autorizado del Ministerio del Ambiente de Panama, 
la Autoridad Nacional Designada / Punto Focal de Panama. 
De conformidad con la decision B.08 / 10 de! GCF, cuyo contenido reconocemos haber revisado, por 
la presente comunicamos nuestra no objeci6n al programa tal como se incluye en la propuesta de 
financiamiento. 
Al comunicar nuestra no objeci6n, se da a entender que: 
(a)El Gobiemo de Panama no tiene objeciones al programa ta! como se incluye en la propuesta de
financiamiento;
(b)El programa, ta! como se incluye en la propuesta de financiamiento, se ajusta a las prioridades,
estrategias y planes nacionales de Panama;
c)De conformidad con las salvaguardias ambientales y sociales de! FVC, el programa incluido en la
propuesta de financiaci6n se ajusta a las !eyes y reglamentos nacionales pertinentes.
Tambien confirmamos que nuestro proceso nacional para determinar la no objeci6n al programa, ta! 
como se incluye en la propuesta de financiamiento, se ha seguido debidamente. 
Tambien confirmamos que nuestra no objeci6n se aplica a todos los proyectos o actividades que se 
implementaran 
dentro del alcance del programa. 
Reconocemos que esta carta se pondr�i_sp9�ici6n de! publico en el sitio web de! GCF. 
At t t u .. .'_:�t-_:}_:::·_-_.,.:.:_ 
(' ..... ,' ' \ -l.;,);l · .... · ... �. ...•, 
�{ . .. 
r ... � 
• • ' 
'. .. '
MILCIADES CON PC:re, ::� \ . .. ,_ �, /, 
Ministro de Ambiente '?1 '.!�'.)" ·, .. ,·Li·'·' �-�/ · . 
. . . . '\'� .. {"�-�Ct.., r-�-.� .,.,.�> -:·/ Mm1stro de Med10 Ambtente �%�;-,3_12:,;�-< .. _,:,..-Autoridad Nacional Designada / Punt<'.i':P.:oeallie-Panama. 
MC/AGA/LC/GPC/FV/melida.j 
�rp. Albrook, Calle Broberg, Edificio 804 
Republica de Panama 
Tel.: (507) 500-0855 
www.miambiente.gob.pa 
Page 83


---
*Page 88*
---

Page 84


---
*Page 89*
---

Repu
blic of the Philippines
VEl'AKTIVIENT U~~lNANLE
Roxas Boulevard Comer Pablo Ocampo. Sf.Street
Manila 1004
Mr.YANNICK GLEMAREC
Executive Director
r"rrf1t"ri"t nf th" Crn"n liim'1t" [linn
175Art Center-daero, Yeonsu-gu
Incheon, Republic of Korea
SUBJECT Funding Proposal by the Pegasus Capital Advisors LPregarding Global
Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window
uearcxecuuve uuector l:lLtIVIAKtL:
Werefer to the programme titled Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window in the
Philippines asincluded in the funding proposal submitted by Pegasus Capital Advisors LP
(Pegasus).
ThfIlnnfr~ipnfn i~ rhfnlll\{nllrhnri7fn rfnrf~fnrnri\{f nf rhfnfnnrrmfnr nf Finnnrf rhf
National Designated Authority of the Philippines.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge tohave reviewed,
we hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding
proposal.
a.TheGovernment of theRepublic of the Philippines has no-objection tothe
programme as included in the funding proposal;
b.The programme asincluded in the funding proposal is in conformity with the
national priorities, strategies andplans of the Philippines;
c.In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the programme
as included in the fundino proposal is in conformity withrelev~nt mHionallaw5 ann
regulations.
Wealso confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as
included in the fundingproposal has beendulyfollowed.
Wealso confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented
within thn rrnnn nf thn nrnar'1mm"
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on theGCFwebsite.
Verytruly yours,
Page 85


---
*Page 90*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
Basic project  or programme information 
Project  or programme title  Global Fund for Coral Reefs  Investment Window   
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Private  
Accredited entity  Pegasus Capital Advisors (PCA)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category I -2 
Location – specific 
location (s) of project  or 
target country or location (s) 
of programme  Africa: Comoros , Kenya *, Madagascar*, Mozambique , 
Seychelles , and Tanzania*; 
As
ia-Pacific: Cambodia *, Fiji*, Indonesia*, Malaysia*, 
Maldives *, Philippines , Solomon Islands *, Sri Lanka *, Tim or  
Leste *, and Vietnam *; 
La
tin America and the Caribbean: Bahamas , Belize , Brazil , 
Colombia *, Costa Rica *, Dominican Republic *, Ecuador *, 
Guatemala, Honduras *, Jamaica, Mexico , and Panama ; 
Middle East: Egypt * and Saudi Arabia *. 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management ( ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website Friday, September 3, 2021  
Language(s) of disclosure  English, Arabic, Bahasa Indonesia , French, Khmer, Malay, 
Portuguese, Sinhala, Spanish  and Vietnamese .  
*Denotes country for which an NOL has not yet been received, some of which may be removed from the 
F
unding Proposal before the submission deadline.
Page 86


---
*Page 91*
---

Explanation on language  These are the official languages in each of the target 
countries, except for the Maldives where English is spoken 
by most of the population    
Link to disclosure  English : 
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR -ESS-English.pdf  
Arabic : 
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR -ESS-Arabic.pdf   
French : 
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR -ESS-French.pdf  
Indonesian : 
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads /202
1/09/GFCR -ESS-Indonesian.pdf  
Khmer:  
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR -ESS-Khmer.pdf  
Malay:  
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR -ESS-Malay.pdf   
Portuguese:  
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR -ESS-Portuguese.pdf   
Sinhala:  
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/up loads/202
1/09/GFCR -ESS-Sinhala.pdf   
Spanish:  
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR -ESS-Spanish.pdf  
Vietnamese:  
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/202
1/09/GFCR -ESS-Vietnamese.pdf  
Other link(s)   www.pcalp.com/impa ct 
Remarks  An ESMS consistent with the requirements for a Category I -
2 programme is contained in the ‘Environmental and Social 
Management System (ESMS) ’. 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan ( RAP ), Resettlement 
Policy Framework ( RPF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) , IPP  Framework  (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Page 87


---
*Page 92*
---

Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)  
Date  September 3, 2021  
Place  All National Designated Authorities were  provided the link 
to the ESMS documents (www.pcalp.com/impact ), which 
are also accessible from NDA offices (see contact 
information here:  
https://www.greenclimate.fund/countries ). 
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  TBD  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  Monday, October 4, 2021  
No
te: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.  
__
______  
Page 88


---
*Page 93*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12 /Rev.01  
Page 89 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP180 
Proposal name:  Global Fund for Coral Reef s Investment Window  
Accredited entity:  Pegasus Capital Advisors LP (Pegasus  or PCA ) 
Project/programme size:  Large  
I. Assessment of the independent  Technical Advisory Panel  
1.1 Impact potential                Scale:  High  
1. Coral reefs provide an important ecosystem for underwater  life, protect coastal areas  by 
reducing wave energy, erosion and storm damage , and provide food security and livelihoods to 
more than 1 billion people worldwide  through the ecosystem services, coastal protection and 
economic activities they generate.  
2. However, climate change is warming  the oceans with devastating consequences to coral 
reefs, which are experiencing increasingly frequent mass coral bleaching events that can 
eventually lead to coral death, while ocean acidification weakens reefs and slows their growth.  
According to the pr oposal, even under the moderate emissions scenario of representative 
concentration pathway  4.5, the sea surface temperature in the major  coral regions is expected 
to rise between 1.18 °C and 1.44°C by the end of the century, eliminating most warm -water cora l 
reefs by 2040 –2050. Coral reefs are projected to decline to 10 –30 per cent of former cover at 
1.5°C warming and to less than 1 per cent at 2°C warming ( Intergovernmental Science -Policy 
Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services,  2019).  
3. Corals are n ot only suffering from climate change but from increasing direct 
anthropogenic pressures from different sources. The combination of local anthropogenic 
disturbance and ocean warming means that up to 75  per cent  of reefs are already considered 
threatened ,1 weakening their ability to continue providing valuable ecosystem goods and 
services to people.  
4. Causes of anthropogenic pressures to corals include overfishing and poor management 
of fish resources, poverty and lack of economic opportunities, increasing co astal development, 
unsustainable and uncontrolled tourism, poor pollution control and waste management, and 
limitations of the human ability to restore coral reefs.   According to the project proponents, 
although the global outlook for corals is bleak, ther e is evidence from a range of field studies and 
modelling exercises suggest ing that efforts to manage local impacts on coral reefs can 
ameliorate the impact of rising temperatures and ocean acidification. In other words, from a 
reef management and policy p erspective, the impacts of climate change increase the need to 
abate other stress factors on reefs.2   
5. On the other hand, local drivers of degradation  are deteriorating the resilience of coral 
reef ecosystems to climate change and jeopardizing vital ecosy stem services for which the reef -
 
1Burke, L, Reytar , K., Spalding, M. D., Perry, A. L. 2011. Reefs at Risk Revisited.  World Resources Institute, The Nature 
Conservancy, WorldFish  Center, International Coral Reef Action Network, UNEP World Conservation Monitoring 
Centre, and Global Coral Reef Monitoring Network. Washington, DC. 
2 Hoegh -Guldberg, O., Poloczanska, ES, Skirving, W., Dove, S. 2017. Coral Reef Ecosystems under Climate C hange and 
Ocean Acidification, Frontiers  in Marine Science, 29 May 2017. Available at: 
<Https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2017.00158>


---
*Page 94*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12 /Rev.01  
Page 90 
 
 
dependent communities in the targeted countries have few other alternatives that can provide 
income, subsistence and coastal protection. In terms of coastal protection, coral reefs play an 
important role, together with mang rove swamps and seagrass beds, in dissipating wave energy, 
as climate change leads to stronger storm surges combining with sea level rise to cause coastal 
erosion, coastal flooding and saline intrusion in many regions.  
6. Although mitigating the global incre ase in sea surface temperature and ocean 
acidification are widely out of the control of local efforts, protecting priority coral reef 
ecosystems and addressing local anthropogenic stressors makes reefs more resilient to the 
effects of climate change and better adapted to rebound from bleaching events.  
7. Therefore, the Global Fund for Coral Reefs (GFCR) Investment Window intends to target 
the most resilient reefs by identifying those areas most likely to be either more resilient to 
climate change or those reg ions and localities where the impacts of climate change will be less 
extreme. These reefs act as climate refugia for other species, continuing to provide a suitable habitat despite regional climate change, and are likely to be critical in preventing further reef 
degradation and considerable loss of biodiversity. These less vulnerable reefs also have 
potential to reseed to other regions once the climate has stabilized.  This process has been 
undertaken with the support of the 50 Reefs Initiative that has identified an optimum global 
portfolio of reefs for targeting coral reef conservation that have the potential to survive the 
impacts of accelerating climate change.  
8. In this context, the GFCR  aims to enhance the resilience and adaptive capacity of coral 
reef ecosystems and the communities that are highly dependent upon them to climate change 
and biodiversity loss, through unlocking and de -risking private investment.  
9. The programme seeks to achieve this goal by raising a US D 500 million fund, the GFCR 
Investme nt Window  (IW) , that will enable the financing of 20  to 30 companies, projects and 
platforms across three target sectors : 
(a) Sustainable ocean production to address overfishing, destructive fishing techniques , and 
accelerate restoration ; 
(b) Ecotourism to address  unsustainable tourism and accelerate restoration ; and 
(c) Sustainable infrastructure addressing pollution.    
10. The GFCR will be structured as a blended finance vehicle with a junior and senior 
tranche. 
11. The IW will be supported by a g rant window (GW), that aims to establish an enabling 
environment for the IW, more broadly to financing coral reef resilience initiatives, and ultimately to de -risk private sector involvement in the sustainable blue economy. Grant funding 
from the GW targets  technical assistance, capa city development, emergency grants, and 
monitoring and evaluation, and contributes to pipeline incubation and sourcing for the IW.    
12. The GFCR I W is expected to directly benefit those individuals engaged in reef -first 
businesses and livelihoods, and indirectly benefit the coastal  communities that depend on the 
targeted reef. The number of expected direct beneficiaries are 12,737 , people who will have new 
jobs created by projects supported  through the GFCR. This number was estimated based o n the 
number of emp loyees in similar expected businesses multiplied by 30 expected investments.  
13. The indirect beneficiaries were estimated based on the number of people in the 28 
target countries who live at low elevations that are protected  by reefs. These estimations were 
derived from a study  around the global estimates of the number of coral reef fisheries .3 The 
proposal estimates that there  will be 39,585,636 indirect beneficiaries . However, the 
 
3 Teh, LSL., Teh, LCL., Sumaila, R. 2013. A Global Estimate of the Number of Coral Reef Fishers. Available at:  
https://doi.or g/10.1371/journal.pone.0065397


---
*Page 95*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12 /Rev.01  
Page 91 
 
 
independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP)  considers these are only draft number s as so far, 
the GFCR has only 7 no objection letters4 from the target  countries and even if ultimately the  
invest ment  applies to  27 countries, not all the coastal inhabitants will benefit from relatively 
small interv entions .   
14. Healthy reefs will, in turn , increase the health and resilience of related ecosystem 
services that are important in adapting to climate change  (such as maintaining fish nurseries, in 
face of declining fish stocks and disaster -risk reduction/buffers to coastal erosion), ultimately 
benefiting coastal communities and sectors such as ecotourism, sustainable fishing and 
aquaculture, and coastal development .  
15. To the TAP’ s questions around adaptation of  who, to what and how to measure 
adaptation impacts, the proponents responded  that the GFCR offers two pathways to 
adaptation:  
(a) Area 1:   Enhancing resilience of vulnerable coral reef- dependent people, communities,  
and regions to climate change in two ways:  
(i) Ecosystem -based adaptation projects to protect coral reefs ; and 
(ii) By creating diversified livelihoods and financial resilience ; and  
(b) Area 2: Enhancing resilience of coral reef ecosystems to climate change by protecting 
the most resilient reefs.  
16. The project presents an estimate in annex  XXIII of the potential impact of the GFCR on 
people and planet.  The methodology involves five  steps to dete rmine the area of reefs that may 
have resilience improved.   The end results , based on a range of outputs, totalled 49,377  ha, but 
this was reduced to avoid double counting to a total of 29 ,040 h ectares . This is based on the 
proportion of reefs considered at risk in the world.  
17. Since the GFCR is a blind pool investment vehicle and, as such, has a specific portfolio of 
funded projects  in countries that  have yet to be identified, it is early to assess the re al impact 
potential of the project.  
18. In response to a request from the TAP concerning the eligibility criteria and tools to 
screen and monitor projects throughout the due diligence process and lifetime of the projects to 
ensu re climate impacts specifically on coral reefs and dependent communities , the proponents 
submitted additional  documents.   These included a  Monitoring and Evaluation Plan ( annex 11) 
providing information on how impact indicators will be managed, with indicative budget, 
data/source, collec tion tools, frequency, and means of verification. This included a  draft 
template ( annex 11b) for regular monitoring of investees to support data collection for 
quantification of adaptation outcomes. However, this template has very few indicators on coral 
reefs.   
19. The proponents also submitted draft eligibility criteria that provide the basis for 
determining whether a potential investee is within the project’s scope. The  draft criteria are  on 
the right track  and, according to the proponents, will be further developed with the support of 
the technical entities involved in the grant window.  Furthermore, they provided sector -specific 
theories of change ( annex 25) outlining key adaptation outputs/outcomes against which 
potential investments will be screened (as described in the draft eligibility criteria).  
20. Moreover, they submitted GFCR investment principles in the aquaculture sector that 
clearly set out valuable scientific information for the key performance indicators and best 
 
4 The funding proposal was submitted to iTAP on 21 July 2021, with 5  NOL. In response to iTAP questions on the 
number of NOLs, the proponents submitted 2  additional NOLs, and explained that more NOLs are expected before 
B30.


---
*Page 96*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12 /Rev.01  
Page 92 
 
 
practice aquaculture f or coral reefs. The proponents noted that they will develop screening and 
monitoring investments for each asset category/subsector.  
21. They also elaborated a simple GFCR Investment Screening and Monitoring Approach in a 
spreadsheet that guides the screening and monitoring process for (potential) investees. Key 
dimensions covered include assessment of a baseline, policy dependencies, additionality and 
systemic change, and methodologies for monitoring and quantifying impact.   This tool will 
constitute a working  document that is shared within and between the i nvestment and g rant 
windows. The spreadsheet will be updated on a weekly basis and discussed during the weekly 
calls between the investment and g rant window s.  
22. In response to the TAP’s request to provide mor e examples of how the GW will support 
the IW, the  proponents  also provided a sa mple framework of  the GFCR GW programme. This 
tool will be used by convening agents under the GW to monitor the progress of programmes  in 
achieving resilience of coral reef syst ems and communities that depend on these systems. In 
addition, these frameworks will also serve as a key tool to monitor how the programmes 
transition through different phases (short, medium and long -term outcomes) , with the aim of 
tracking and ensuring up take of reef- positive financial mechanisms/approaches and businesses. 
Frameworks such as this will be used to support development of monitoring frameworks for the 
IW. 
23. The impact potential depends on the ability of the IW and the GW to coordinate actions 
in selected climate refugia areas, combining policy and control actions to protect reefs, 
technologies and incentives to restore and protect coral reefs and actions to enhance 
sustainable livelihoods.  
24. The TAP considers that  the scre ening, investment and monitoring tools provided by the 
project proponents to ensure climate impact are on the right track but  need further work to 
ensure that the  fund will target investments with clear climate change impact potentia l.  The 
overall impact po tential if high.   
1.2 Paradigm shift potential                 Scale:  High 
1.2.1.  Innovation  
25. The GFCR is the first fund in the world to unlock critical new sources of fund ing through 
blended finance solutions to remove stresses on coral , restore coral reefs and support 
vulnerable reef -dependent communities, in the face of accelerating climate change.  
26. It is also one of the few funds managed by commercial fund managers such as Pegasus, 
that connects to the philanthropic community in a parallel grant fund able to p rovide technical 
assistance and capacity building in the sustainable blue economy.   It therefore  enables private 
and public institutions and investors to work together, de -risking the entrance of private capital 
in the protection and conservation of  coral reefs.  
27. The fund will invest in a diversif ied portfolio of options that could potentially involve 
new techniques and innovation to re store  coral reefs , to avoid water contamination and to 
promote sustainable fishing , mariculture,  and aquaculture , among othe rs. 
28. The fund adopts science -based knowledge and a systems approach to target the most 
resilient reefs to support conservation activities . The t echnical institutions of multiple actors 
currently joining actions to save oceans and specifically coral reefs  will provide further support . 
29. The theory of change is well developed, although a little ambitious, since the GFCR will 
eventually  invest in around  30 to 50 projects/companies, in several countries , and diverse 
climate refugia area s. A few investments in each of the target areas  will not , on their own,  
achiev e all the expected outcomes.


---
*Page 97*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12 /Rev.01  
Page 93 
 
 
30. The outcomes involve:  
(a) Increased  production of food in reef -dependent communities ; 
(b)  Increased protection and restoration of coral reefs ; 
(c)  Growth in jobs and  the local economy ;  
(d) Increased  innovation to support resilience in coral reefs and communities reliant on 
coral reefs ; and 
(e) Increased  market share of sustainable businesses in reef -dependant areas.   
31. These outcomes will be achieved by investing in sustainable ocean production, 
sustainable tourism and sustainable infrastructure and waste management . The examples of 
projects presented with the funding proposal (currently in the pipeline) are very diverse, 
including resorts , sea cucumber farms, companies that r emove plastics from the ocean, tilapia 
aquaculture, wastewater utility plants, green shipping and offshore clean energy.  
32. There is a need to review the word “sustainability” repeated several times in the 
proposal . On one hand prove climate change impacts with specific criteria and on the other 
hand prove sustainable development co -benefits.  
33. Potential ly these investments could help business -as-usual to grow while coral -
damaging practices simply continue in parallel. Therefore,  the TAP is recommending t hat 
investment and monitoring tools  currently  under development  are presented to the  satisfaction 
of the  GCF secretariat before the first disbursement and  complemented duri ng the lifetime of 
the project to track progress on the enabling environment . 
1.2.2.  Potential for knowledge and learning  
34. The project  involves a range of actors that could potentially create a community of 
stakeholders willing to share experiences and learn from each other.  The integrated dual 
window model enables the GFCR to build on the respective strengths and remits of the two 
windows, and ultimately to mobili se finance from prospective partners on a global scale to 
support countries in improving their progre ss to achieving adaptation to climate change. The 
GW will ensure capacity building actions and could potentially create a platform for knowledge 
sharing.  
35. However, the current proposal does not include much information about the GW . 
Therefore, it will be re commended that the IW de signs the means and methodologies to ensure 
that there is potential for knowledge and learning in collaboration with the actors involved in each of the countries , with a specific emphasis o n strengthening local capacity to protect coral 
reefs.  
1.2.3.  Contribution to the creation of an enabling  environment and regulatory 
framework 
36. Within the market study the project presents a section with detailed country -specific 
information such as context, stressors and drivers of degradation, i ncluding  information on 
current policies regarding coral reefs in the selected countries.  
37. The fund will rely o n the GW to support the creation of an enabling environment and 
regulatory framework to protect coral reefs. To the TAP question on how to ensure  that there 
are regulatory and control actions in place in the countries  where  the GFCR will invest, the 
proponents replied that during the proposal development  stage, convening agents (The Nature 
Conservancy, Wildlife Conservation Society, W orld Wildlife Fund , Conservation International, 
MAR Fund and Blue Finance) are tasked with assessing government policy  and working  to


---
*Page 98*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12 /Rev.01  
Page 94 
 
 
ensure project alignment with government commitments and priorities as these  relate to coral 
reef resilience.  
1.2.4.  Scalability and replicability  
38. The scalability and replicability will depend o n the ability of the GFCR to prove validity 
of the model and to attr act further finance. It will also depend on the opportunity to work 
together with the GW and the convening actors to ensure lessons learned and effective 
investments could be replicated in other coral reef refugia areas.  
39. Overall, the TAP  considers that invest ing in a coordinated manner though the IW and 
the GW in  activities that will conserve coral reefs presents a high paradigm  shift  potential.  
1.3 Sustainable  development potential             Scale: High 
1.3.1.  Environmental  co-benefits  
40. The ecosystem services provided b y coral reefs and associated ecosystems are 
especially vital for achieving nature -dependent UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), 
including SDG 14 ‘Life Below Water’ . In total, coral reef initiatives contribute directly to 13 SDGs 
through entry points t hat include coral reef tourism, food security and nutrition, shoreline 
protection, and human health and well -being.  
41. Restoration activities will directly address existing degradation and enhance the 
capacity of coral reef ecosystems to withstand local stressors and bleaching events, thereby limiting the extent of future degradation.  
42. Reduced pressure on fisheries due to an increase in mariculture and aquaculture 
production will result in restored fish stocks, greater biodiversity and healthier marine 
ecosystems.    
43. The project will support the r eduction in ocean contamination from land -based and 
ocean -based pollution and  will create models to ensure eco -efficient coastal development. Some 
of the proposed projects, including agriculture with low -chemical and green shipping , could 
have the potential to support both the green and blue econom ies in selected countries.  
44. Through t he GW, the project will support e nhanced marine protected areas and no -take 
zones, that will in turn ensure the protection of vital marine ecosystems.  
45. It is estimated that reefs protect 150,000 km of shoreline in more than 100 countries 
and territories, re ducing wave energy  and heights, erosion and storm damage,  thus protecting 
over 1 billion people (and their property) liv ing within 100 km of reefs around the world. This 
results in an estimated reduction of annual expected damages from storms of over USD 4 billion 
globally.  As sea levels continue to rise, this protection becomes vital.  
1.3.2.  Economic co -benefits  
46. Protecting coral reefs will ensure economic benefits to communities that depend on 
them for their fishing activities. Six million reef fishers ( many of w hom are small -scale, 
traditional subsistence fishers) depend on coastal- reef fisheries, with an estimated value of US D 
6.8 billion in 2011. Women represent about 50  per cent  of the workforce in the seafood sector 
and 80 per cent  to 90 per cent  in the post -harvest sector.  
47. Protecting coral reefs and supporting sustainable tourism will benefit many 
communities and countries that depend on this activity for income generation. Coral reefs 
attracted (prior to COVID -19) an estimated 70 million visitors annually with an associated 
expenditure of US D 36 billion .


---
*Page 99*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12 /Rev.01  
Page 95 
 
 
48. Reduced economic impacts from expected damages from storms are stated in the 
environmental co-benefits  above . 
1.3.3.  Social co-benefits  
49. Diversified economic opportunities will be created  for reef -dependen t communities, 
often poor and vulnerable and disproportionately affected by climate variabilities. The foremost 
beneficiaries are those who would get (green) employment opportunities in the subsectors.  
50. Capacity enhancement of communities to develop sustain able fishing and aquaculture 
activities will help  to support sustainable livelihoods while reducing the pressure on coral reefs.  
51.   Awareness of the importance of coral reefs will result in more communities managing 
the sustainability of coastal and ocean r esources as collectives.  
52. Coastal communities will ensure food security, with increased and healthier proteins 
from aquatic food industries and better -managed community fisheries.    
53. Improved health and reduced disease prevalence will ensue from sustainable 
infrastructure limiting exposure to pollution and waste flow into the ocean.  
1.3.4.  Gender -sensitive development  
54. In the current absence of country -specific data, the GFCR has conducted peer -project 
assessments to help identify the drivers of change and the gender dynamics needed to achieve 
the GFCR project adaptation and mitigation goals. In the absence of concrete projects at this 
time, the proponents presented case studies of selected pro jects around the world, deriving 
lessons learned and recommendations for the intended private sector projects of the GFCR.  
55. According to the proponents, ecosystems and ecosystem services are strongly linked to 
gender disparities and have significant potenti al to impact the gender and social relations 
within communities. Engaging women in the sustainable production and harvest of marine 
resources and in ecosystem conservation efforts can have an exponential effect in 
simultaneously addressing ecosystem challe nges and gender inequality.  Moreover, women’s 
contributions in aqua - and mariculture are often overlooked, underestimated and/or 
undervalued, often resulting in women’s marginalisation in the management of marine 
resources.  
56. The GFCR present s a gender action plan, including several outcomes. It is expect ed that 
each project will develop its own gender assessment and action plan and  detailed guidelines 
and processes will be provided for project proponents.  
57. Several steps should be implemented at  project level, including:  
(a) Understand  fully  the GFCR p olicy, its scope, and application ;  
(b) Apply  gender -related safeguarding principles ;  
(c) Conduct  gender -responsive stakeholder consultation ;  
(d) Conduct  gender analysis and baseline determination ;  
(e) Develop a gender commitment statement ;  
(f) Define goals and measure change;  and  
(g) ending in establish gender actions.  
58. The proponents present gender safeguards in the GFCR g ender policy ( annex 2) that are 
applicable for all projects. In addition, country - and sector -speci fic gender issues derived from 
gender analysis will be also assessed. These may vary from project to project.


---
*Page 100*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12 /Rev.01  
Page 96 
 
 
59. Overall, the TAP considers the sustainable development  potential to be high.  
 
  
 
1.4 Needs of the recipient               Scale: High  
1.4.1.  Vulnerability of the country and vulnerable  groups  
60. The GFCR expects to invest in up to 2 7 countries, most of which are developing 
countries. As of August 9, 2021, Pegasus had received 7 no -objection  (NOL ) letters  from : 
Bahamas, Belize, Comoros, Guatemala, Mozambique, Panama and Seychelles .   
61. Almost all  of these countries have coastal reef areas with vulnerable communities, 
especially th ose that depend on fisheries for their livelihoods.   The  scale and intensity of 
climatic and biodiversity vulnerabilities vary by countries  and drivers of degradation. However, 
the main impacts related to the death of corals remain the same: decrease in food supply, 
shoreline vulnerability and decrease in touri sm inflows .   
62. In addition to  bioclimatic vulnerabilities, the national economic and social environment 
can further increase the vulnerabilities of coral- dependent communities. Moreover, the 
economies of these countries and coastal areas  are highly dependen t on tourism, which has 
been severely affected due to C OVID-19.  Coral reef tourism accounts for USD 36 billion a year 
across coral reef countries. Of that, USD 19 billion comes from “on -reef’ tourism: d iving, 
snorkelling, glass -bottom boating, and reef -related wildlife watching. International tourist 
arrivals decreased by more than 50 per cent and millions of jobs have been lost, including those in the informal economy.    
63. The project presents several adaptation barriers that are common to most  of the 
selec ted countries, including low awareness of the economic importance of coral reefs that has 
led to a lack of public and private funding for initiatives that protect and enhance the health of coral reefs and associated ecosystems. There are also policy, institutional and regulatory gaps, 
with ministries and authorities that fail to balance coastal and marine zone development with 
social or environmental imperatives to prevent degradation or even destruction of coral reef ecosystems.  
64. There are weak policies (in  some countries,  non-existent ) to protect coral reefs and 
there is a lack of institutional capacity to oversee, monitor and enforce control over reef 
resources.   The proposal is relying on the GW to tackle these needs , but there should be a clear 
strategy to invest in areas where the countries are willing to take action to protect ocean 
resources.    
65. There is  also limited private finance for reef adaptation and conservation. Public 
investment, which provides an important platform for private sector growth and development, 
is also frequently limited. Populations are more vulnerable to extreme events and to the 
degradation of  reef s, and local governments do not have strategies, capacity or means to 
address their needs through large -scale program mes. 
66. Investments in coral reefs are therefore very limited .  Increasingly , private investment 
capital and innovative finance tools are needed to efficiently scale- up initiatives to save coral 
reefs and build the resiliency of communities that depend on them.  
67. Even though all the countries are in need of additional resources to protect ocean 
resources , and specifically coral reefs, it is of crucial importance to ensure that countries 
prioritize policy actions and carry out control s to ensure the effectiveness of the fund.  More


---
*Page 101*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12 /Rev.01  
Page 97 
 
 
importantly, since this blended finance vehicle will involve private entities, it is expected that 
the recipients  of the resources commit to support the overall aim of the project and not just to 
use its structure for their own goals.  
68. Understanding that the direct recipients are private sector companies willing to invest 
in coral reef protection b ut that ultimately the beneficiaries are vulnerable coastal communities 
and the coral reefs on which we all depend, the TAP scores the needs of the recipients as high.    
1.5 Country  ownership          Scale: Medium  
1.5.1.  Alignment  with national climate strategy  
69. The proponents present a market analysis with an analysis of the selected countries in 
terms of reef status, policies and investment environment. As explained above, the proponents 
have received seven NOL s and are expecting to receive two  more , from Fiji and the Philippines.  
70. According to the proponents, in the course of the NOL process, the GFCR has liaised with 
governments in order to ensure that they are in alignment with existing policies around coral reef preservation an d other sustainability initiatives, and to ensure that the GFCR both 
capitalizes on and promotes political momentum on these issues. This process has included 
iterative engagement with, for instance, representatives of target countries to articulate the 
compliance  and complementarity  of GFCR  with existing country commitments and strategic 
visions.  
71. Not all countries have clear policies and strategies to protect coral reefs. However, most 
of the countries have climate change strategies. There has been an effort from the project 
proponents to engage with national designated authorities (NDAs) to clarify the position of each 
country’s nationally determined contribution on marine and coastal measures. These NDA 
discussions have enabled direct conversations with r elevant government bodies dedicated to 
marine protection in general and coral reef s in particular.  But there is a lot of room to provide 
policy support.  
72. Convening agents  will be tasked to engage with all relevant actors at the national level in 
the process  of project selection and due diligence to assess government polic ies and ensure 
project  alignment with government commitments and priorities as it relates to coral reef 
resilience.  
73. Moreover, the GFCR has been set up by a large a lliance composed of the UN 
Development Programme  (UNDP) , UN  Environment Prog ramme  (UNEP) , UN  Capital 
Development Fund  (UNCDF) , Paul Allen Foundation and Prince Albert II of Monaco Foundation, 
which in turn bri ng together a series of global and regional actors identified below , each of 
which is in full liaison with the ministries of the respective national Governments:  
(a) Belize, Guatemala, Honduras and  Mexico : Mesoamerican Reef ( MAR ) Fund ; 
(b) The Bahamas: The Nature  Conservancy, Bahamas National Trust, Bahamas National 
Protected Areas Fund, Coral Vita, Reef R escue;  
(c) Kenya and Tanzania: W ildlife Conservation Society  with  Okavango Capital, Blue 
Ventures, UNEP ; 
(d) Indonesia: Conservation International, Blue Abadi Fund, Bir d Head Seascape, Coalition 
on Media and Education for Development Africa Forum  (CAFOR );  
(e) Philippines: Blue Finance  together wit h, Blue You, Conservation International, Rare, 
University of the Philippines;  
(f) Fiji:  UNDP ;


---
*Page 102*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12 /Rev.01  
Page 98 
 
 
(g) Maldives:   full programme still unde r development ; and 
(h) Solomon Islands ; project concept notes under development.  
74. However, some of the NOL countries are not in the above list . There is therefore a need 
to create a similar coalition of convening agents and actors to work in those countries , for 
example,  Comoros, Mozambique, Panama and Seychelles.  
75. It is expected that all major stakeholders , including UN agencies, national G overnments 
and non- governmental organizations , will individually and collectively associate at different 
levels , involve the relevant national ministries and agencies, and engag e them in supporting the 
work around coral reefs. Unless a joint effort takes place, the individual investments will not 
make a difference in ensuring the overall purpose of the project prot ect the last coral reef 
refugia areas in the world. In particular, promoting selected sustainable businesses will be 
ineffective if it is not accompanied by policies and incentives to scale them up, as well as 
enforc ing of legislation or regulations to pre vent  unsustainable practices.  
1.5.2.  Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
76. Pegasus  Capital Advisors, L.P. (“Pegasus”), a Delaware limited partnership is an 
accredited entity (AE) to GCF.   Pegasus is a leading global private markets imp act investment 
manager. As the first U nited States  private equity fund manager with GCF accredit ation , the 
company is dedicated  to fostering sustainable growth while providing attractive returns for 
investors.  Founded in 1996, with a track record in  commercial impacting investing, Pegasus has 
invested more than USD 2.6  billio n.  
77. To deliver the project  Pegasus will create the following entities:  
(a) The “GFCR Fund” – a pooled investment vehicle which is expected to be a special limited 
partnership under the laws of Luxembourg ; 
(b) The “General Partner” – expected to be a société à responsabilité limitée (ARL) under the 
laws of Luxembourg la w.  The General Partner will be managed by employees of the AE  
or its controlled affiliates;  
(c) The “Manager” – expected to be a Delaware limited liability company.  The Manager will 
be controlled by employees of the AE  or its controlled affiliates, except to  the extent the 
Manager is required by law to have one or more employees, managers or directors in its 
jurisdiction of formation.   The Manager will be owned, directly or indirectly, by either 
the AE or the AE ’s sole limited partner, Craig Cogut ; 
(d) “GCF Reef Holdings” – an entity to be formed by the AE , which is expected to be a 
Delaware limited partnership.  GCF will be the sole limited partner and sole economic 
owner of GCF Reef Holdings.   Holdings GP will be the general partner of GCF Reef 
Holdings ; and  
(e) “Holdings GP” – is expected to be a Delaware limited liability company.  Holdings GP will 
be controlled by employees of the AE  or its controlled affiliates.   Holdings GP will be 
owned, directly or indirectly, by either the AE  or the AE ’s sole limited partner, Craig 
Cogut.  
78. The investment activities of the GFCR will be overseen by the AE , via the GFCR 
Investment Committee.   The Investment Committee will be comprised of a majority of members 
appointed by the AE  and will act by majority vote.  
79. The overall strategy of the fund is to work in a dual model through the grant wind ow 
(GW) and investment window (IW).   Both windows will  perform independent but 
complementary and coordinated roles to seek to maximise impact of the GFCR.


---
*Page 103*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12 /Rev.01  
Page 99 
 
 
80. Grant funding from the GW targets technical assistance, capacity development, 
emergency grants, and monitoring and evaluation, and contributes to pipeline incubation and 
sourcing for the IW.   The GW delivers its mission with the support of th e UN Multi -Partner Trust 
Fund Office (UNDP, UNEP, UNCDF), the Government s of France, Germany and the U nited 
Kingdom , and the private foundations , Paul G. Allen Family Foundation and Prince Albert II of 
Monaco Foundation. A  group of convening agents compose d of The Nature Conservancy, 
Wildlife Conservation Society, W orld Wildlife Fund , Conservation International, MAR Fund and 
Blue Finance , will work together to maximize the impact of the GFCR . All of these entities have 
proven capacity to work in support of ocean resources.  
81. The governance around the GW and IW is designed to work in a collaborative and 
efficient manner.   The GW will act as an observer  in the IW Investment Committee , and IW will 
also act as an observer and advisor to the Executive Board of the  GW.  
82. Key stakeholders from the GW – the UNEP, UNDP and UNCDF – will be involved in pre - 
and post -investment activities, including sourcing, due diligence, monitoring and reporting, and 
will be able to provide guidance, knowledge and access to relevant net works as required.  
83. The GFCR  Advisory Board  will adopt a shared focus on the strategy for and progress of 
the two w indows and will  advise on strategic issues advanced by both the Investment 
Committee and the Executive Board. The Advisory Board’s scope includes the development of guidance to both w indows based on the evolution of best practices in the fields of coral reef 
conservation, impact  investing (including investment standards), blended finance, investment 
standards and sustainable business development.  
84. In the view of the TAPs view, the Advisory Board should play a vital role in ensuring the 
overall strategy of the GFCR (GW and IW) and  should therefore meet more than just once a year.   
Moreover, as there will be r egular and ad  hoc meetings taking place between the IW and the 
GW, involving the UN Global Team and Investment Committee  to al ign on project and 
investment priorities, there co uld be an opportunity to involve governments at least once a year 
to also align on their strategies to protect coral reefs and ocean resources.  
1.5.3.  Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant  stakeholders  
85. Pegasus has contacted the NDAs main ly to ask them for their NOL s.  The level of 
engagement has been around sending the concept note and funding proposal, presentation of 
the concept , and exchange of questions and responses.   This is a major weakness of the 
proposal, since the level of engag ement with governmental actors has been low.  
86. To mobilis e stakeholders in each of the countries, the GFCR is relying on actors involved 
in the GW. The GW  is mobilis ing its network of internal resource and external partners  on an 
ongoing basis . The IW is also mobili sing local stakeholders by either leveraging the EA and BNP  
Paribas  internal resources or by involving intermediaries (R20 and Systemiq).  
87. There have also been consultations with the convening agents activating  their local 
networks to enhance the fund’s access to critical political, social and economic stakeholders in 
target countries, including government, other civil society organizations, and the private sector.   
They will also contribute to pipeline development through identifying potential projects for 
consideration by both the IW and GW.  
88. The proponents present a GFCR stakeholder consultation and engagement policy taken 
from other similar projects, but not necessarily align ed with questions and objectives around  
coral reefs and coastal communities. Moreover, on the project level, the revised environmental 
and social management system (ESMS)   stakeholders’ concerns are captured and potential risks 
are adequately identified; groups and peoples whose lives might be affected by the project are 
properly consulted to verify and assess the significance of any impacts; affected groups and


---
*Page 104*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12 /Rev.01  
Page 100 
 
 
communities participate in the development of mitigation measures, in decision -making 
regarding their operationalization, and in monito ring their implementation.  
89. However, both in the stakeholder consultation policy and in the ESMS, there needs to be 
much more refinement to ensure that the procedures are not only to avoid potential social and 
environmental risks and to ensure that people are not affected . There also needs to be a more 
participatory approach to really  involve communities in designing the  projects and to have a 
clear focus on indicators to protect coral reefs and livelihoods of coral reef -dependent 
communities.  
90. Overall, the TAP considers that countries should have more ownership of the GFCR , even 
investing in the proposed investment and grant windows, and proving that they are seriously 
prioritizing actions to protect ocean resources considering  climate change. Since to date the 
project  has received only a few NOL s and has little information on the real priorities of the 
countries in this crucial endeavour, the overall score for country ownership is medium.  
1.6 Efficiency  and effectiveness       Scale: Medium –High  
1.6.1.  Cost -effe ctiveness  and efficiency  
91. The requested GCF amount is up to USD  125,000,000 for funding the Funded Activity 
(the “GCF Proceeds”) that will expect to  leverage  an additional  USD  375  million  for a total of up 
to US D 500 million.  
92. The Fund Subscription Agreement will set forth the capital commitment of GCF Reef 
Holdings to the GFCR, which will be USD 125 million . The proposal further specifies that : 
(a) GCF Reef Holdings will unconditionally commit USD 25 million at the initial closing, 
which amount will be increased to USD 50 million if the GFCR procures at least USD 10 
million of additional co -investment at the first closing ; and  
(b) The remainder of the commitment will become unconditional at subsequent closings in 
an amount such that, after giving effect to such closing, GCF Reef Holdings represents no 
more than 25  per cent  of aggregate commitments to the GFCR.  
93. Furthermore, for each disbursement , the GFCR should ensure that  at least 60 per cent of 
the funds previously disbursed have either been cumulatively spent or disbursed to  the funded 
activity or are expected to be spent or disbursed within 30 calendar days after receipt of the 
disbursement.  
94. The GFCR will be structured as a blended finance vehicle with a junior and senior 
tranche. The p ublic contribution to the junior tranche will seek to leverage up to three times 
that amount in private capital in the senior tranche.  GCF participation in the GFCR will be in the 
form of a junior limited partnership  interest (the “ junior interest ”) provided that, if after the 
final closing of the GFCR, GCF Reef Holdings represents more than 25  per cent  of the total 
commitments to the GFCR, the portion of GCF Reef Holdings’ commitment in excess of 25  per 
cent  will automatically be converted into senio r limited partnership interests (the “ senior 
interests ”).  It is expected that GCF via GCF Reef Holdings will be the sole investor in the j unior 
interests.


---
*Page 105*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12 /Rev.01  
Page 101 
 
 
 
95. Further mobilisation is expected at the portfolio company level where the leverage ratio 
is just  over 1:3 (i.e. every dollar of GFCR capital deployed will mobilise an additional USD 2.4 of 
debt or equity). The GFCR aims to adhere to the OECD blended finance principles of 
additionality and minimum concessionally  to ensure the viability of the GFCR while mobilising 
private capital rather than crowding out private investments.   The mobilisation rations 
expected are the following:    
96. Equity -only leveraging effect is 1:0.3 per 90 per cent  of the GFCR . At portfolio company 
level, the GFCR will largely take control equity positions on the target investments.   In many 
cases, however, GFCR  expects to have additional equity co -investors.   In a conservative scenario, 
each USD 1 of equity invested in a company is expected to generate on average USD 0.33 of 
additional equity . 
97. Debt -only leveraging effect is 1:1.5 . Taking a conservative approach, Pegasus believes 
that, given its track record, the average investee balance sheet could consist  of 60  per cent  debt 
and 40  per cent  equity . The debt is expected to be provided  by additional third parties such as 
local or international banks . 
98. Venture Capital ( VC) leveraging effect is 1:3 per  ~10  per cent  of the GFCR.  It is expected 
that approximately 10  per cent  of the portfolio may be dedicate d to VC investments and/or 
convertible debt/mezzanine positions. Given the nature of VC investment, the assumption is 
that GFCR  will hold on average 25 per cent  of the portfolio company, granting a control over the 
decisions of the investee while giving ro om for additional equity funding rounds . The 
mobilisation ratio of these types of investments is 1:3 .  
99. According to the proponents, d edicating part of the fund to venture capital investments 
allows the GFCR to participate in the effective scale up of disruptive technologies which will be 
sustainability game changers,  especially in the sustainable ocean production industries that the 
GFCR  intends to invest  in.  
100. Aggregating 90  per cent  equity (with a 1:0.3 mobilisation ratio) , 40 per cent  debt (with a 
1:1.5 m obilisation ratio) , and 10  per cent  VC or other instruments (with a 1:3 mobilisation 
ratio) , the projected leverage downstream in the portfolio companies is around 1:2.4 . 
101. In relation to the term sheet  some points should  be noted:  
1.6.2.  Operational expenditure  costs and f ee structure


---
*Page 106*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12 /Rev.01  
Page 102 
 
 
102. Pegasus will invest  (Pegasus commitment)  1 per cent  in the GFCR . The actual amount 
could range  from USD 250.000 to USD  5 million  of co-financing , depending on fund raising . 
103. The management fee is in line with accepted comme rcial benchmarks and in the 
circumstance that the fund does not yield any return, the fee will be recovered from the capital , 
mostly given by the GCF.  
104. The GFCR budget estimates  management expenses and partnership  expenses .  The 
budget presented to iTAP did not have disaggregated information , and therefore these numbers 
are difficult to assess . The TAP recommends that Pegasus provides the GCF secretariat with a 
precise list of the team members and what they will be paid, as th e largest part of the budget is 
salaries.  
105. Pegasus is already managing the GCF funded project “Global Subnational Climate Fund” 
for USD 150 million and USD 18.5 million grant , and d uring this round, Pegasus is also 
presenting the CRAFT project . It is very important  that for each of the investment projects, 
Pegasus involves the correct team of experts able to respond to the specific project.  It is also 
important to ensure that the teams managing the GCF funding vehicle are clearly identified to 
avoid overla p of responsibilities.  
106. Pegasus will receive  AE fees in addition to the management fee at the GFCR  level.   
107. The administrative and third -party  costs that are excluded from the management fee 
and are charged separately to  the GFCR , include additional resources  for consultants . This 
expense on top of the management fees is not substantiated sufficiently in the proposal , and the 
explanation around the need for th ese consultants is not presented .   
1.6.3.  Waterfall and performance fee 
108. The waterfall st ructure lays out how funds will be distributed to investors. Under the 
existing  waterfall structure, senior investors other than GCF get their investment amounts, fee 
reimbursement and target return ( higher than then the GCF return) first , before GCF (juni or 
investor) recovers any funds.   GCF comes next in the waterfall structure and recovers its 
investment  and fees and  gets a return  before Pegasus can earn a performance fee. Pegasus is 
next in line to collect a performance fee calculated at a percentage of the distributable funds.  
1.6.4.  Fund raising  
109. As explained above GCF will commit USD 25 million initially and USD 25 million once 
Pegasus has raise d USD  10 million.   GCF commitment is linked to future fundraising thereby 
maintaining a 25  per cent  share of the fund until reaching the USD 125 limit.  
110. There is a scenario where Pegasus fails to raise much of the money and the fund 
becomes a majority GCF funded project. GCF would be  absorbing a high percentage of costs and 
fees including all external exp enses (accounting, custodian , etc.).  
111. In the view of the TAP,  the effectiveness and efficiency of the GFCR is undermined by the 
overall operational expenditure costs and AE fee, especially  if the fund is unable to raise more 
capital. T here is a need  to bala nce commercial vehicles using  concessional resources from GCF 
for public goods . Moreover, the TAP believes that the level of concessionally  given to the fund 
manager could be revised in two ways:  
(a) In terms of waterfall structure and performance fee, by considering mak ing the GCF 
target return the same as that of senior investors. Although there is some benefit in GCF  
having a lower target to senior investors in certain limited scenarios, most of the benefit 
accrues to Pegasus. Arguably the senior investors would  not be impacted very much by 
this since they get their target return first ; and


---
*Page 107*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12 /Rev.01  
Page 103 
 
 
(b) In terms of fund raising, by linking  the second USD 25 million  GCF contribution to a n 
amount  higher than USD 10M.  For example, USD 75 million  would make more logical 
sense and it would be an important indicator to GCF of the AE’s confidence in 
fundraising. Another alternative worth exploring is capping the percentage of GCF 
capital in the junior share to 30  per cent  of the amount of non -GCF funds raised. These 
two approaches could avoid a scenario where the fund is GCF majority funded and a 
small amount of senior investors (and the manager) are over subsidized by GCF.  
112. It is difficult for the TAP to estimate the efficiency and effectiveness of the fund, since it 
depends on the ability to leverage additional resources and , more importantly, to invest in 
transactions that prove impact potential to protect the coral reefs of the world. As stated in the impact potential section, isolated investments in selected coral reef regions will not make an 
impact, unless there are effective legislations in place, control and sufficient  action in one coral 
reef area to shift the path of coral reef degradation.  
113. Overall, the TAP considers that the efficiency and effectiveness score  is medium –high.  
II. Overall remarks  from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
114. The independent TAP recommends that the Board approve  the project subject to the 
following condition s: 
(a) Prior to the execution of the FAA, the Accredited Entity shall deliver, to the satisfaction of the GCF secretariat, the  final versions of the monitoring plan and annexes, eligibility 
criteria and investment principles for all the GFCR sectors.  
(b) During the lifetime of the project present annual reports including joint  impacts of both 
the grant window and investment window in  selected coral reefs.


---
*Page 108*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12 /Rev.01  
Page 104 
 
 
Reply to the Independent Technical Advisory Panel  assessment 
findings  (FP180)  
Proposal  name : Global Fund for Coral Reefs Investment Window  
Accredited entity : Pegasus Capital Advisors (PCA)  
 
Impact potential  
The assessment noted that screening, investment and monitoring tools provided by the AE are on the 
right track but need further work to ensure that the fund will target investments with clear climate 
change impact potential. The project proponents will fur ther refine these tools as a condition  to FAA 
execution.  
 
Paradigm shift potential  
The iTAP asks that the GFCR review its use of the word ‘sustainability’ in the FP. The GFCR is happy to 
review the FP and make changes to wording in order to better distinguish fund impacts delivering genuine ‘sustainable development’ co -benefits vs. fund 
impacts that address the effects of climate 
change.  The assessment notes that the Theory of Change, while well developed is perhaps over -
ambitious, given the limited number of discrete investments that will be made across a wide geographic 
area. The GFCR acknowledges that not every outcome noted in the Theory of Change will occur in every 
investment location. However, the GFCR does strongly feel that given the fund’s focus on three core 
investment themes, its systems -led approach (which will encourage multi ple synergistic investments in 
a given area), and its interactions with the Grant Window’s activities, it is likely that in the regions that 
receive investment, several of the outcomes described in the ToC can be simultaneously achieved, and 
ultimately drive overall fund impact through delivering critical adaptation benefits to reef ecosystems 
and vulnerable communities.  
The assessment comments that the FP does not include much information on the GW, and recommends that the IW design the means to ensure tha t there is ongoing knowledge and learning collaboration 
between in -country actors for the two windows, in particular in order to help strengthen local capacity. 
Annex I below includes an example form The Bahamas on how Convening Agents are key actors to ensure that local organizations have key roles in GW programme implementation  which will also open 
the doors for IW investments. The GFCR notes that the framework agreement for the IW and GW is under 
development and nearing completion. This agreement provide s guidance on how IW and GW actors will 
work together and collaborate, and as such addresses this consideration.  
 
Sustainable development potential  
Needs of the recipient  
The assessment acknowledges that the countries within the programme are characterized by coastal 
reef areas with vulnerable, reef -dependent communities for whom the degradation of coral reefs 
represents a direct and pressing threat to food supply, shorelin e integrity and tourism revenues. It 
appreciates that while the recipients of funding are private sector companies investing in coral reef 
protection, it is ultimately vulnerable coastal communities who are the beneficiaries.  
The assessment recognizes that weak policies and institutional environments are a key current 
adaptation barrier in many countries, and appreciates that in the context of the GFCR, the GW will play 
a key role in taking steps to strengthen these elements. T he assessment also suggests that there should 
be a clear strategy to invest in areas where countries are willing to take action to protect ocean resources.


---
*Page 109*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12 /Rev.01  
Page 105 
 
 
While the GFCR agrees that investing in areas where local governments and institutions are amenable 
to strengthening their capacities and policies on ocean protection is optimal, it also notes that in some 
cases investment may be part of the means through which policy change is enabled and incentivized. For 
instance, investment may increase the evidence base that governments require to make policy change.  
A strong private sector in the areas of focus will also lobby local governments for such policy changes. 
Besides, i t will build track record to demonstrate that reef conservation, resilience and effectiv e 
ecosystem- based adaptation contributes to economic development, creating stronger incentives for 
action to attract investment. In parallel, grant window activities and co- financing from partners are likely 
to be directed towards enabling policy support, capacity building and synergistic financing mechanisms. As such, investment may not exclusively target areas where local institutions have already signaled  an 
intention to strengthen the policy or enabling environment, as the expectation is that the proces s of 
investment will in some cases be key to building these intentions.  
 
Country ownership  
 
The Accredited Entity is confident  that, given the current trajectory for receipt of NOLs, it will obtain 
additional NOLs before the Board publication deadline. The number of NOLs has risen from 5 at the point 
at which the FP was submitted to iTAP, to 7 by the time of the iTAP call, and has now risen to 1 5.  In the 
last two weeks  alone, the Accredited Entity received NOLs from Fiji,  Mexico, Jamaica, Kenya , Colombia, 
Ecuador , Sri Lanka and Philippines.   
The assessment notes the role of the GFCR Advisory Board in monitoring the overall strategy of the two 
windows.  The Accredited Entity agrees that the advisory board should meet more frequently than once 
per year.  The TORs for the advisory board have not been finalized, but Pegasus will ensure that the TORs 
call for quarterly meetings.  
The assessment conveys concerns about engagement with governmental actors and other relevant 
stakeholders (paras. 82 -87).   Stakeholder engagement is an important tenet of GFCR and is reflected in 
the GFCR’s ESMS.  We expect to engage in more robust stakeholder engagement, including relevant 
government and civil society organizations, during the evaluation and development stage f or individual  
investments .    
The assessment suggests that there is potential for the fund to provide policy support to countries on 
marine protection and coral reefs.  It also emphasizes that unless a joint effort across all major 
stakeholders takes place in terms of driving policies and incentives to scale up sustainable businesses, 
and enforcing legislation or regulation prohibiting unsustainable practices, then individual investments will not drive the fund’s desired overall impact. As noted above, the GFCR expects that it will drive 
favourable policy change through the combined effect of GW activities and actors, the fund’s powerful 
demonstration effect, and by providing the right incentives for policy change that will attract further 
investment. The Gr ant Window and Investment Window will also work closely together in countries to 
ensure that a coherent and consistent strategy is pursued for creating favourable enabling 
environments. The Framework Agreement which is currently being finalized will provid e more details 
on the ways of working that will enable this collaborative approach.  
iTAP also notes that not all NOL countries currently have specific Convening Agents or dedicated organizations charged with building presence and relationships on the groun d. The GW is currently 
work ing to build relationships with coalitions of actors working within those countries, either through 
the fund’s existing partners, or where necessary, through relationships with new partners . In this way, 
the GFCR will strive to e nsure that it has local relays with which it can work in every NOL country.  GCF 
will have access to the updated list of convening agents through the seat it proposes to have  at the 
Advisory Board.


---
*Page 110*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12 /Rev.01  
Page 106 
 
 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
In response to iTAP’s specific concerns, it is important to note that the GFCR budget is an estimate based 
on a number of assumptions over a period 15 years.  In particular, the budget makes a number of 
assumptions about the ramp -up of the investment team that will need to be hired to service the fund.  
For the sake of clarity , the GFCR budget  made a number of simplifying assumptions. These included 
assuming no return  of capital  and assuming that  there would be no recycling of capital.  In practice,  the 
fund  expects returns, and  recycling of capital is an important tool that fund managers use to deploy more 
of a fund’s commitments in investments as opposed to fees.   Given Pegasus’ track record  in this regard 
(see chart below), we believe it likely that GFCR w ill recycle s ufficient capital such that a substantial 
portion of the commitments will be deployed in investments .  The chart below shows a summary of 
Pegasus’ prior fund commitments and cumulative invested capital:1 
(All figures in $mm, except percentages)  
  Committed 
Capital  Cumulative 
Invested Capital  % of 
Commitments 
Invested  
Fund V  623.7  666.4  106.8%  
Fund IV  750.0  740.0  98.7%  
Fund III  316.3  356.1  112.6%  
Fund III  561.0  630.1  112.3%  
Fund I  232.6  236.2  101.5%  
 
Consistent with Pegasus’ prior experience, the Accredited Entity will seek to deploy as much of the 
GFCR’s commitments into investments as possible.   
The assessment requested additional details on the team that will manage the fund.  As the fund is still 
in its developmen tal stages, the dedicated GFCR team will be built -up as the fund is raised and capital is 
deployed.  A s a condition to FAA effectiveness, Pegasus will hire a senior -level person  with appropriate  
sector and geographic experience to serve as head of investments.  That person will work with the 
existing Pegasus team to further build out the mid- level and junior employees  with appropriate sector 
and geographic experience.  The employee compensation  in the budget is primarily an estimate, based 
on Pegasus’ prior hiring experience, of the cost of the team.  In addition,  existing Pegasus employees , 
including Craig Cogut, David Cogut and Brian Friedman , will dedicate a portion of their time to GFCR as 
well, in addition to the ir other responsibilities, including the  Global Subnational Climate Fund.   The 
Pegasus team has ample experience managing multiple pr oducts, and we fully expect to devote sufficient 
time and attention to GFCR (as well as any  othe r Pegasus initiatives).  
 
The Accredited Entity acknowledges iTAP’s comments concerning the level of concessionality (para. 99).  
However, the Accredited Entity believes that the level of concessionality and de -risking provided by the 
GCF will be key to mobili zing capital for the fund, given that the GFCR is not only a new fund, but also the 
first to be dedicated to SDG -14 and that it is adopting a pioneering dual -window approach  
This is especially critical given that f undraising  for the senior tranche will focus on unlocking private and 
commercial capital, including institutional investors and banks . As the junior loss tranche,  GCF financing 
will be instrumental  in aligning the risk and  expected  return profile of the fund with the appetites of 
 
1 As of 12/31/2020


---
*Page 111*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12 /Rev.01  
Page 107 
 
 
these target investors. Accordingly, the Accredited Entity respectfully conveys its objection to decreasing 
GCF’s concessionality as proposed.  
 
Overall remarks from the independent T echnical Advisory Panel : 
The Accredited Entity accepts the conditions from iTAP.


---
*Page 112*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12 /Rev.01  
Page 108 
 
 
Annex I  
GFCR Grant Window Convening Agent Partnership Example  
The Bahama  Reefs  Programme, whose Convening Agent is The Nature Conservancy (TNC) builds 
on the experience of TNC in The Bahamas and on the established network of partners working to 
conserve and restore coral reefs in the country. TNC as a global science -based conservation 
organisation has been developing knowledge and tested approaches to protect coral reefs in 
different r egions, including in several Caribbean countries.    
 
As Convening Agent, TNC has assembled a wide array of actors to deliver the expected 
programme results (see table below).  
Co-recipients organisations  
 
(UN organisation or non -Profit who can be eligible for direct access to the GFCR)    
UN Capital Development Fund 
(UNCDF)  UNCDF will play a key role to channel grants and concessional 
loans to some of the interventions included in the preliminary 
pipeline. UNCDF is part of the GFCR investment continuum 
through its Blue Bridge. UNCDF has not supported projects in 
The Bahamas yet, but it has the required technical capacity to 
work with the projects TNC identified.  
Partner organisations  
(e.g., government, NGO, private business; not receiving GFCR funds, local public of commercial 
bank, financial institution)   
Access Accelerator Sustainable 
Business Development Center 
(SBDC) —NGO  SBDC is a Bahamian non -profit founded in 2018 by the 
University of the Bahamas, the Bahamas Chamber of Commerce 
and the Ministry of Finance. By the end of the last fiscal year, 
SBDC had funded USD 49.9 million to Micro, Small and Medium -
sized Enterprises ( MSMEs), with 9,488 clients registered. SBDC 
provides the required technical capacity in the financial aspects, 
which complements TNC skills that are more focused on the 
environmental and social aspects. SBDC will operate a specific 
Blue Economy programme u nder the  BahamaReefs  in 
partnership with TNC.    
Bahamas Protected Areas 
Fund (BPAF) —NGO  BPAF is a national conservation trust fund created by the BPAF 
Act in 2014 to help ensure sustainable financing for the 
Bahamian marine parks. It is a body corporate g overned by a 
multi -stakeholder Board of Trustees. One of its responsibilities 
determined by the Act is to establish and maintain a Register of 
Protected Areas. BPAF will support TNC carrying 
out grantmaking  for non -profits within the  programme, 
and conveni ng stakeholders supporting enabling conditions.  
Perry Institute for Marine 
Science (PIMS) — NGO  PIMS conducts research throughout The Bahamas and other 
parts of the Caribbean. PIMS also conducts a wide range of 
conservation, education and citizen science programmes. It is 
one of the oldest leading research organisations in The Bahamas 
founded more th an 50 years ago, in 1970. PIMS and TNC have a 
long -standing consolidated partnership, collaborating in specific 
projects, such as the Bahamas Coral Reefs Report Card. PIMS will 
provide the most accurate information on the current status of


---
*Page 113*
---

 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.12 /Rev.01  
Page 109 
 
 
Bahamian reefs a nd will be a hub for the programme to work 
with a network of small dive shops and other tourism businesses 
in restoration efforts.   
  
Elizabeth Harbour 
Conservation Partnership  
(EHCP) —NGO  EHCP is a community -based Bahamian non -profit organisation 
conceive d during the Exuma  GEF -IWCAM Project . Its mission is 
to guide the ecologically sustainable development of the coastal 
zone and waters of Elizabeth Harbour with the aim of enhancing 
tourism, fisheries, and recreational use, through stakeholder 
education and participation, and collaborative management of 
harbour facilities. It will implement a community -based busine ss 
focused on the operation of pump -out services, environmental 
monitoring, and the management of moorings.  
  
Bahamas National Trust 
(BNT) —NGO  BNT is a non -profit, non -government, membership organisation 
founded in 1959 by the BNT Act. It is governed by a 29 -member 
council made up of appointed representatives from some of the 
most prestigious conservation and scientific organisations in the 
world and from government. BNT currently manages 32 MPAs in 
the country. It will implement new structure s and revenue 
streams in Abaco MPAs with the support of Blue Finance. BNT 
has the mandate to potentially replicate the experience in Abaco 
to other of its managed areas.  
  
Blue Finance —NGO  Blue Finance has a track record of establishing blended finance 
solutions for the management and sustainable financing of 
MPAs. The NGO implements collaborative management 
agreements between non -profit partners and local governments, 
providing technical assistance, as well as management and 
marketing expertise.  It has projects in MPAs in the Dominican 
Republic and in Belize, successfully attracting private finance. It 
is a direct partner of GFCR.  
  
Coral  Vita —private company   Coral Vita is a for -profit founded in 2015 with a land -based coral 
farm established in Grand Bahama in 2018. Its vision is to create 
a global network of high -tech coral farms to support coral 
restoration. It has an ambitious business model to provide 
diffe rent services around coral restoration, including tourism, 
education, increased resilience and reef repair. It will implement 
the expansion of its business and support the development of 
new restoration technologies to scale up restoration.


---
*Page 114*
---

GFCR  Gender Assessment  
Contents  
1. Overview  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 1 
1.1 Country Ownership  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  2 
1.2 COVID Assessment  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  2 
2. Project Category Assessment  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  3 
2.1 Sustainable ocean production to address overfishing, destructive fishing techniques, 
enhance food security and restore degraded coral reef ecosystems  ................................ .......................  4 
Specific Project Assessment  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  5 
2.2 Ecotourism to address unsustainable tourism and create revenue streams to enhance coral 
reef protection and restoration  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  7 
Specific Project Assessment  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  8 
2.3 Sustainable infrastructure and waste management to address pollution  ................................ ... 10 
Specific Project Assessmen t ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  12 
2.4 Sustainable Development Goals  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  13 
3. Fund Application  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  16 
3.1 Safeguards and Consultation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  17 
3.2 Gender -Responsive Project Design  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  19 
3.3 Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  20 
4. Sources and Endnotes  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 21 
ANNEX 1 GFCR GENDER ACTION PLAN  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  22 
ANNEX 2 GFCR GENDER POLICY  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  38 
1.Overview
The Global Fund for Coral Reefs (GFCR) Gender A ssessment  serves as the foundation  to strengthen
the programme’s responsiveness to the multiple, culturally -derived  principles of gender equality
and women’s empowerment, and to address the links between gender equality, climate
adaptation, and environmental sustainability. The Assessment informs the accompanying Gender
Action Plan , both at fund and project level, with  indicators and targets to support GFCR
commitments to and engagement with women, men, girls and boys, including those from
marginalized communitiesi, in compliance with GCF and GFCR gender policies. The Assessment
and Action Plan support the GFCR Environ mental Social Management System (ESMS).
The Assessment builds upon  quantitative data and qualitative evidence derived desk review of 
existing literature , case studies, and secondary databases, as noted in the Source s section. Like  the 
ESMS , the GFCR  Gender Assessment and Action Plan are living documents  and will be regularly 
updated to reflect key developments , including :  
1.Portfolio : The GFCR  aims to fund  projects in up to 28 selected  countries. The GFCR is a blind
pool investment vehicle and, as such, specific portfolio of funded project s, and indeed the
countries  in which those projects may  occur , have  yet to be identified . Relevant country -
specific , sex-disaggregated gender data  must be assessed as the prospective project pipeline is
developed and host countries become known.
Page 110


---
*Page 115*
---

2.COVID -19: The full impact in the long ter m of the global COVID virus is unknown . Findings
have already suggested that  it has ha d differentiate d impact s in the lives of men and women.
With respect to reproductive work, w omen and girls , already disproportionately responsible
for household duties, including water, food and fuel collection; food preparation; and taking
care of children as well as elderly and ill relatives , have experienced heightened levels of
responsibility in the midst of the pandemic and subsequent stay -at-home orders . In addition,
home quarantines, market impacts and food shortages have also been found to  increase
household tensions  and,  as a result , women have been  expose d to higher risks of domestic
violence.  The Assessment and Action Plan will be updated as virus -related development ,
people differentiated impacts  and strategies for remediation become more clear.
1.1 Country Ownership  
The Fund investment focus is on regions that depend on coral reefs for food, protection, and 
income . It seeks to stimulate local government as well as select private sector entities and 
philanthropies to implement effective management of land/seascapes that integrate climate 
change adaptation and climate resilience planning to enhance the resilience of co ral reef 
ecosystems in select SIDS and LDCs. However, the G FCR  fully adheres to the principle of country 
ownership . The Gender -responsive  Assessment and Action Plan s for every funded project will 
seek to align  with prevailing international ratified legal f ramework s, regional and national  gender 
policies , or other public policy for gender equality and women’s empowerment . The assessment 
and action plan  will seek also to align the project with other national development strategies that 
promote equal opportunities , poverty reduction  and sustainable  use of natural resources  whether 
in the intervention region or the sector. This will include analysis of the gender equality landscape 
and data relevant to  the host country and in the targeted sector(s) , inc luding Nationally 
Determined Commitments (NDCs) .ii 
1.2 COVID Assessment  
The GFCR  will begin implementation before the impacts of the global COVID -19 virus crisis are 
fully known. However, it is clear that the impacts will be felt deeply in the host countries in which 
the GFCR  plans to invest (see Graphic 1, below). With respect to gender -related impacts, the 
Committee for the Coordination of Statistical Activities (UN -CCSA) concludes that COVID -19 will 
disproportionately impact the vulnerable and compound  existing inequalities. Impacts  may 
include food shortages, mobility restrictions, decre ased access to health care  and education , higher 
unemployment , and increases in domestic violence .”iii   
Page 111


---
*Page 116*
---

Graphic 1 : Confirmed cases of COVID -19, July 202 1 
The COVID -19 pandemic is threatening fragile gains on gender equality and women’s rights. As 
countries respond to the crisis, sex-disaggregated data is critical to examine the differential impact 
on women and men towards evidence -based decision -making.  Globally,  women on average do 
three times as much unpaid care  and domestic work as men – a workload that intensifies  with 
school closures and when health systems are  overloaded.  Additionally, research has begun to 
surface indicating that women are more vulner able to losing their jobs than men in response to 
the crisis. Widespread job losses will have long -term impacts  for women’s economic independence 
and security . With 740 million women globally in informal  employment and a majority employed 
in services,  wome n are being, and will continue to be, particularly hard hit by the impacts of the 
COVID crisis.iv  Indigenous communities and specifically women and children are also more 
vulnerable due to overcrowded housing, unsafe water, and poor access to healthcare.v  
Assessments of social impacts show that the COVID -19 crisis has disproportionately harmed a 
num ber of vulnerable groups, including women employed in temporary jobs, low -skilled workers, 
small -scale fishers and businesses, Indigenous community members and younger workers. 
Women represent the majority of the workforce in the ocean economy sectors hard est hit by the 
crisis —about 50 % of workers in the seafood sector, 70 % in aquaculture, 80 –90% in the post -
harvest sector of small -scale fisheries and 54 % in tourism. As businesses lose revenue, many will 
reduce their costs by laying off workers, starting wi th the temporary and casual jobs 
disproportionally occupied by women . Women  are likely to be most affected by job losses in the 
tourism sector (based on the proportion of women employed in low -skilled jobs in the sector).vi 
The GFCR  Gender -responsive  Assessment and Action Plan will be updated on a regular basis to 
reflect the impacts of COVID in host countries and related project sectors.  
2.Project  Category Assessment
As previously noted, the GFCR  will be  a fund of projects that may operate in up to 28 countries.
GFCR is a blind -pool investment vehicle, meaning the specific portfolio of funded projects, and
indeed the countries in which those projects will occur, will not be identified in advance.  At such
time  as host countries and prospective  pipeline projects are identified , GFCR  will seek country -
specific , sex -disaggregated data  by project type to inform gender -responsive project design and
implementation . This activity will be supported by framework guidelines on gender assessment ,
to ensure that project proposal and implementation mainstream gender .
Coastal communities are heavily reliant on marine resources for their livelihoods and food 
security. Engagi ng these communities in conservation, restoration, and sustainable management 
of natural habitats can provide much -needed income in the short -term, while building socio -
economic resilience as countries strive to revitalize their coastal economies.vii 
In the  current absence of country -specific data, the GFCR  has conducted peer -project Assessments 
to help i dentify the drivers of change and the gender dynamics needed to achieve the fund’s project 
adaptation and mitigation goals . This will help to understand how the fund  can address gender 
vulnerabilities and design  specific gender elements in the different project categories.  
The GFCR  will invest in the following project categories (all Category B or C ): 
1.Sustainable ocean production to address ove rfishing, destructive fishing techniques ,
enhance food security and restore degraded coral reef ecosystems
Page 112


---
*Page 117*
---

2.Ecotourism to address unsustainable tourism  and create revenue streams to enhance coral
reef protection and restoration
3.Sustainable infrastructure and waste management to address pollution
GFCR  has assessed each project categor y beginning with the Gender -Related Vulnerabilities and 
Capacities for Change in GCF Projects.viii In addition, the  following  assessment  and information  is 
framed using the Six Domains of Gender Analysis Framework Approachix including :  
1.Access  - to resources, income, services, employment, information, and benefits, poverty
rate, formal / informal employment, unemployment, division of labour;
2.Knowledge, Beliefs, and Perception  - commonly held beliefs, perceptions, and stereotypes,
mobility, vuln erable groups;
3.Practices and participation  - adult literacy rate, skills training and gaps, attendance at
meetings and training courses, and accepting or seeking out services;
4.Time and Space  - how time is spent and how men and women each contribute to the welfare
of the family, community, and their society;
5.Legal rights and status  – legal status of women, access to healthcare, access to and
management of resources (economic, financial, physical,  natural, other assets), access to
ownership and recourse;
6.Power and Decision Making – existing gender inequalities that may be exacerbated by
project impacts, anticipated differences in vulnerability and adaptive capacityx, use of
household and individual  economic resources, choice of employment.
The peer projects were selected based on their suitability for GFCR. Although some projects were 
implemented by NGOs, important lessons and recommendations can be drawn from the cases 
nonetheless, which contribute to a private sector and business -oriented approach.  
2.1 Sustainable ocean production to address overfishing, destructive fishing techniques, enhance 
food security and restore degraded coral reef ecosystems  
Table 4: - GCF Results Area Ecosystem a nd ecosystem servicesxi 
GCF Result Area  Vulnerabilities  Capacities for Change  
Ecosystem and 
ecosystem 
services  Share and number of 
women depending on 
ecosystem and ecosystem 
services for livelihoods  Roles of women in the community/ 
household with reference to natural 
resource use  
Share of women and men in the natural 
resources / agricultural labor market and 
type of occupation  
Policies and institutional framework to 
promote gender equality in access to 
ecosystem services  
Ecosystems and ecosystem services are strongly linked to gender disparities, and have significant 
potential to impact the gender and social relations within communities. Engaging women in the 
sustainable production and harvest of marine resources and in ec osystem conservation efforts can 
have an exponential effect in simultaneously addressing ecosystem challenges and gender 
inequality .  With ecosystems at an increased risk of destruction as a result of climate change, it is 
increasingly evident that women a nd men should equally be involved and included in efforts to 
develop resilient ecosystems.  
Page 113


---
*Page 118*
---

 
Women’s contributions in aqua - and mariculture are often overlooked, underestimated and/or 
undervalued, often resulting in women’s marginalisation in the managemen t of marine resources. 
Coastal activities are usually highly gendered, both in where and how women participate in value 
chains and how their contributions are valued and prioriti zed. Women mostly involved in pre - and 
post -harvest activities . However, g ender blindness results from a focus on formal and paid fishing 
activities (traditionally male -dominated) in research, management and policies, disregarding 
informal and unpaid activities, usually dominated by women. Fisheries agencies are also 
commonly focused on the production segment of fish value chains, even though twice as many 
people may be employed in related activities, such as processing and marketing, which are often 
dominated by women. Such marginali zation has often happened despite in creasing recognition 
that women play a critical role at every link in small -scale fisheries value chains. In addition, 
gendered access barriers occur at several points along the fisheries value chain. These can include 
indirect barriers, such as gender nor ms, or mor e direct barriers including  lack of access to fishing 
gear, fishing grounds, fishing markets or financial capital, including credit, as well as lack of 
education or alternative livelihoods . Policies on matters such as spatial management can also have 
a disproportionate impact on women and other marginalised groups that may not have access to 
boats or motors that would allow them to reach other fishing zones .xii 
Small -scale fisheries support the majority of the world’s fisherfolk (47 million women a nd men in 
developing countries alone). Small -scale fishing communities, particularly indigenous and women 
subgroups, often have relatively limited political power compared to large -scale fisheries actors . 
In addition, representatives from coastal communiti es and groups often marginalised (e.g., 
women, indigenous groups, individuals with disabilities and poor people) are frequently not, or 
not adequately, included in decisions related to development (e.g., site selection of ports, energy 
and oil development,  aquaculture) that will impact them.  Inequities are apparent also within 
small -scale fish producing communities. These are often structured along intersecting social 
categories such as wealth, gender, age, religion, migrant status and ethnicity. Inequities  in ocean 
resource benefits may reinforce existing inequities experienced by particular groups in access to 
healthcare, education and rights over land .xiii 
Specific Project Assessment  
 
Scaling Community Seaweed Farming in Kenyaxiv 
Project description:  
Kenya started community seaweed farming in Kwale County on the South Coast in 2013, following 
feasibility studies undertaken by the Kenya Marine and Fisheries Research Institute. The initial 
funding was from a World Bank – funded project that t argeted fishing communities along the 
Kenyan coast, but further funding has been provided by the Government of Kenya to build the 
farmers’ capacity with the aim of developing the initiative into a robust industry to create jobs and 
income. The main objecti ve of supporting the establishment of this new community -led industry 
was to offer an alternative livelihood to local fishing communities whose livelihoods had been 
challenged by reduced income due to the dwindling catches from artisanal fisheries.  
Gender responsive activities of the project:  
Before the project implementation, women typically grew crops in one -acre piece of land and the 
proceeds weren’t enough to send children to school. The intervention specifically supported the 
creation of new jobs and e conomic opportunities for women —90% of seaweed farmers in Kenya 
are women. To date, this support has resulted in the employment of approximately 400 seaweed 
farmers in Kwale County, each with his or her own individual farm generating income that flows 
dire ctly to the farmer. Initially, seaweed farming supplemented their income but has since become 
Page 114


---
*Page 119*
---

their primary income -generating activity.  For the women involved, this has meant financial 
independence from their husbands, with many using the income from their  seaweed farms to 
educate their children up to the university level and constructing permanent house  which also 
brought development to the village. Hence,  women have also been able to bring development to 
the village as a result of the activity.  
The seaweed farmers welfare group has also been registered as a cooperative to improve 
organi zation and collective bargaining power.  The seaweed is also being used in local food 
products. Support is also being provided to diversify the farmers’ income base thr ough the 
development of soap and other cosmetic products, such as body creams, shampoos and hair 
treatment. This  further  supports women entrepreneurship. To date, community -led seaweed 
farming has generated over 300 metric tons of dry seaweed that has gene rated over US$60,000 
for the local village economies.  
Getting organized for conservation  in the Solomon Islandsxv 
Project description:  
In the Solomon Islands, the population lives mainly by fishing and harvesting shellfish. Faced with 
environmental deterioration and depletion of a number of species, WWF has intended  to protect 
the shellfish resource (an important source of income for local women) and improving women’s  
skills in managing, processing, and marketing the resource  across the Solomon Islands.  
Gender responsive activities of the project:  
Several projects across the island included specific efforts to help women overcome barriers to 
their participation in the wider economy. These include improving the ability of women to access 
credit, undertake paid employment, and start their own businesses.  The project s empowered  
women to defend their own interests and take more control over the financial aspects of t heir 
shellfish enterprises. It could be observed that  women of Gizo in the Solomon Islands have taken 
the lead in raising awareness about destructive activities that are damaging their rich marine 
environment. The project s benefit ted f rom wealth of knowled ge on fishing areas, fishing seasons, 
and the use of resources of women . For example, the  initial focus of the Gizo Womens Action Group  
(GWAG)  has been to raise awareness about the need to protect the marine environment, and not 
dumping rubbish into Gizo harbour. The GWAG also undertook clean -ups around the waterfront 
and on local islands, and carried out testing of the water quality around Gizo  town. Elsewhere in 
the Solomon Islands, women from two villages near Roviana Lagoon have helped design shellfish 
reserves for the protection of blood cockle and mud clams, and have played a key role in 
monitoring the effectiveness of the reserve. A valuab le dialogue has been started between outside 
scientists and the women on the results of this monitoring.  
Drivers of change and specific gender elements to be included in the project activities  
From the first assessment above and based on the illustrated c ase studies, the GFCR intends to 
address the following issues:  
• Promote women entrepreneurship  and business opportunities  in sustainable ocean 
production :  As women are involved in the work of feeding, harvesting and processing of 
fish and shellfish, it is important to increase women’s control over ponds and inputs for 
aquaculture to expand the entrepreneurship activities and support pre - and post -harvest 
activities where women are also represented. For example, it is essential that women and 
men equally ben efit from any fishing project and from technical and financial inputs, such 
as boats, fridges and freezers (incl. shared business centres which are predominantly 
managed by women to enable access to fridges and freezers to preserve fish), educational 
mater ials, technical instruments and credits to ensure that women can equally participate 
and control business activities.  
Page 115


---
*Page 120*
---

Since fishing is seasonal, it is also essential to support women in diversifying their business 
activities   as mentioned in the case stud y above. Diversification is of particular importance 
in regions where cyclones, overfishing and rising seas threaten livelihoods. In Madagascar, 
for example, WWF piloted the development of beekeeping and ecotourism to generate 
alternative revenues to fishi ng and protect the mangrove by making it the cornerstone of 
the new activities.    
• Training on skills and awareness about conservation and restoration activities and business 
opportunitie s: In aquaculture, it  is necessary to provide women  with training and formal 
education to improve the efficiency, profitability and sustainability of their business 
activities. This will support their enterprises, increase their income potential and reduce 
their marginalization. Education should focus on improv ing their positions in the post -
harvest activities across the value chain  since female traders  still lack bargaining power. 
They  must be provided with the know -how and access to education and information on fish 
preservation and marketing so they can receive better quality fish and keep it fresh.  
• Women empowerment across the ocean production  sector: Women can be empowered 
politically and socially by acknowledging their wealth of knowledge and including them in 
the broader community and civil society o rganizations . Given women’s important  role in 
the post -harvest subsector, women must be allowed to participate in decision -making 
processes, and be provided with the access to physical and capital resources for developing 
their industry and meeting their n eeds and aspirations . It is also urgent to give women 
equal control in the value chain and profit margins. This is particularly relevant as women 
often still work in low -status, less -skilled and low -paid jobs, and on informal, casual and 
temporary contract s that disqualify them from receiving social benefits . To overcome this, 
more efforts are needed to include women in the most profitable markets and enterprises, 
and to provide them with more employment opportunities in fish processing factories. In 
this w ay, they may profit from increasing market globalization and become less vulnerable 
to decreases in fish catches and poor services.  
2.2 Ecotourism to address unsustainable tourism and create revenue streams to enhance coral 
reef protection and restoration  
Table 1: - GCF Result Area Most vulnerable people and communities  xvi 
GCF - Result 
Area  GCF - Vulnerabilities  GCF - Capacities for Change  
Most vulnerable 
people and 
communities  Share and number of 
women among vulnerable 
groups of population and 
communities  Roles of women in targeted communities  
 
Share of women and men in relevant labor 
markets and type of occupation  
 
Policies and institutional framework to 
address vulnerabilities  
 
With  women representing  54% of those  working in the tourism industry, w omen make up a much 
higher proportion than in other sectors  worldwide. However, t ourism employment can be  
comparatively lower -paid for both men and women than average wages across the broader 
economy.xvii 
 
Page 116


---
*Page 121*
---

 
Similarly, whil e women are the majority of students in formal tourism education, they largely lack 
the high -level and soft skills training needed to ensure their career progression. A lack of education 
or formal training jeopardizes women’s active participation in touris m. This is especially true for 
impoverished women  and in the context of developing countries.  Sexual harassment, gender -
based violence and stereotyping pose serious risks for women in tourism as workers and 
travellers .xviii 
Tourism development can bring other challenges to women living in destinations. Women can be 
particularly, affected because they continue to be primarily responsible for unpaid care and 
domestic work. Issues that may arise include conflicts over access to and use of water, sanitation 
and waste management, sexual harassment and violence in the community, increased cost of living 
for basic consumer goods, and increased rental and property prices. This can lead to other issues 
around alcohol, mental health and  cultural traditions.xix 
It is essential that gender equality training is provided for the public and private tourism sector to 
ensure that awareness and skills are developed in order to maximize tourism’s contribution to 
women’s empowerment . Furthermore,  traditional gender roles are often prioritized over roles as 
business women.  Tourism is often  supplementary or an additional form of labor, given the 
enduring responsibility for unpaid care and domestic work.  
Specific Project Assessment  
 
Entrepreneurshi p in Costa Ricaxx 
Project description:  
Between 2010 and 2018, Proyecto Emprende sought  to understand the coordination of actions for 
women’s empowerment, while developing the ﬁrst real snapshot of the relation between women, 
gender and econom ic empowerment in Costa Rica. Funded by the European Commission, the 
project provided resources to more than 1,500 women entrepreneurs and their 900 businesses, 
focussing on rural women, networking between women, and forging a path between women 
entreprene urs and the private and public sectors.  Some 15% of the businesses that participated in 
the initiative were directly related to tourism, while many others were tangentially related to the 
sector – such as businesses engaged in handicraft production or the provision of food. The main 
reason why the project afforded particular attention to tourism stems from the sector’s 
importance for Costa Rica, both in terms of policy and income generation opportunities.  
Gender responsive activities of the project : 
Page 117


---
*Page 122*
---

Proyect o Emprende offers a strong example of how initiatives can support women’s 
entrepreneurship by providing resources, information, networking opportunities that offer 
women avenues to interact with the private and public sectors . It shed light on the many fac es of 
women entrepreneurs, their needs, the options open to them and the ways in which they turn 
available resources into opportunities for themselves and their families. The kinds of tourism 
activities performed by women in the country allow them to remai n close to their families. This is 
important, as many women are primarily responsible for caring for relatives, such as their parents 
or children, often requiring them to remain at home. To meet the needs of these women, Proyecto 
Emprende revived an initia tive entitled Artesanía con identidad (literally ‘handicrafts with an 
identity’). The initiative selected women artisans and honed their handicraft skills in accordance 
with Costa Rican culture, principles and materials.  Challenges faced were tied to gender norms 
that perpetuate a lack of self -esteem among women entrepre neurs. Although tourism authorities 
provided women with information on tourism accreditation and certiﬁcation, this had the effect 
of increasing women’s insecurities, rather than facili tating their work in tourism. Women felt that 
the criteria and costs involved in attaining certiﬁcation were beyond their reach. Since many 
women could not meet the criteria to turn their informal businesses into formal enterprises, the 
prospect of attaini ng tourism accreditation and certiﬁcation was too far from women’s immediate 
realities and needs.  It demonstrates a gap between tourism’s national importance, on the one hand, 
and the will to adapt tourism conditions to women’s needs, on the other. While t he project sought 
to better understand women’s entrepreneurship in Costa Rica,  the project brought women 
entrepreneurs closer to tourism, rather than bringing tourism closer to women entrepreneurs. As 
a result, for instance, women felt incapable of meeting  tourism accreditation criteria – a challenge 
that could have been solved by adapting criteria to women’s needs and lived realities, while 
offering them training and assistance to navigate requirements.  
Community -based tourism  in Giao Xuan Women Union, Viet Namxxi 
Project description:  
In collaboration with Oxfam and the Centre for Marine -Life Conservation and Development (MCD), 
Viet Nam’s Giao Xuan Women Union worked on a community -based ecotourism project in the 
Xuan Thuy National Park Area. The 29 -month initiative (January 2012 to Dec ember 2014) 
focussed on conservation, livelihoods and gender equality goals.  
Gender responsive activities of the project : 
To achieve its aims, the project supported the community by offering diverse training workshops 
such as capacity building (business sk ills, reception, food service, local environmental knowledge, 
among others) and pilot eco -tour workshops (environmental interpretation, services, businesses 
planning, marketing, etc.). The workshops allowed women to access high income and education, 
to hav e control/power in decision -making over factors of production such as labor , education and 
public services and equal distribution and to work as community eco -based tourism public 
spokespersons and media representatives. In addition, it aimed to support wo men in Viet Nam to 
present a stronger voice in political decision -making, challenge oppressive gender norms, gain 
greater respect, and foster changes in gender roles. Both men and women in Giao Xuan showed 
increased awareness of gender equality issues. The  Lao Cai Province Department of Culture, Sport 
and Tourism, whose jurisdiction covers the Xuan Thuy National Park, is “determined to ensure 
women have the skills to thrive [by] offering training courses in tourism, families are being ﬁned 
for pulling their  children out of school, and ﬁnancial rewards have been introduced to encourage 
further education.” Many women, however, could not attend the project’s workshops because of 
housework and child care. This issue needs to be considered in the future planning of any gender 
equality initiatives, particularly in Asia where childcare concessions are not as readily available as 
in more developed countries.  
Page 118


---
*Page 123*
---

Drivers of change and specific gender elements to be included in the project activities  
From the first assess ment above  and based on the illustrated case studies , the GFCR intends to 
address the following issues:  
• Support entrepreneurship : The tourism sector can offer greater opportunities for women’s 
entrepreneurship than the broader economy and should be support ed as a self -employed 
workforce in tourism. Invest ing in women -led tourism  businesses  and expand ing as well as 
diversify ing women’s market access and fair trade for their tourism products and services  
will support women entrepreneurship in tourism.  
Promote decent work for women in tourism: Since women remain concentrated in low -paid 
and low -level employment in the tourism sect or and can be exposed to sexual 
harassment, it is important to promote equal pay, tackling sexual harassment and 
recruiting women into high -level employment . In addition, measures shall be introduced 
to improve women’s work -life balance in tourism and enco urage an equal division of 
unpaid care work in tourism communities.  
• Skills training for women:  Since there is segregation between men and women in their 
access to tourism -related education and training, which disadvantages women, training 
programmes shall  be developed for women in tourism. This shall include training on soft 
skills, networking and high -level training for career progression.  
• Women empowerment across the tourism sector : Since female leaders are underrepresented 
in tourism due to structural b arriers, gender equality strategies and policies for the tourism 
sector shall increase women’s empowerment. Women should be supported to increase 
high -level women’s leadership in decision -making spaces in the private sector, public 
sector tourism bodies, a gencies, and trade unions.   
• Support women’s needs in the community and civil society : Since women play a key rol e in 
supporting their communities , it is important to facilitate women’s voice in community and 
household decision -making  and implement appropriate policies and measures according 
to women’s needs  through  women’s tourism networks, NGOs and tourism cooperatives . 
2.3 Sustainable infrastructure and waste management to address pollution  
Table 3: GCF Results Area Infrastructure and the built environmentxxii 
GCF Result Area  Vulnerabilities  Capacities for Change  
Infrastructure 
and the built 
environment  Share and number of 
women lacking access to 
adequate infrastructure 
(water supply,  
sanitation, flood protection, 
housing, energy access, etc.)  Roles of women in the design and 
maintenance of infrastructure and the built 
environment  
 
Share of women and men in relevant labor 
markets and type of occupation  
 
Policies and institutional framework to 
promote equal access to adequate  
infrastructure  
 
Coasts are becoming increasingly urban. This  brings with it coastal development (including 
demands for fresh water and sewage treatment) and damage to coastal ecosystems.xxiii People who 
live in coastal regions may suffer the cumulative burden of environmental stress from the activities 
on and overcrowding of the coast and from upstream and inland development. If not properly 
managed, development can result in pollution, defores tation, and inadequate management of soil 
and water. Chemicals and heavy metals found in pesticide runoff and industrial effluents also 
damage human and marine health. Damming rivers can also have negative environmental effects, 
such as soil erosion and de struction of ecosystems that support various fish and marine mammals. 
Page 119


---
*Page 124*
---

When concentrated in small, confined, and overcrowded areas such as coastal zones, pollution and 
other problems pose great  threats to human health . 
Women and girls have specific needs and priorities for water and sanitation infrastructure, 
particularly in relation to menstrual hygiene management, pregnancy and birth. Poor quality and 
genderblind water and sanitation infrastructure can have significant  and lasting adverse impacts 
on the health and educational and economic opportunities for women and girls. Furthermore, 
inadequate water and sanitation facilities for menstrual hygiene management can increase the risk 
of urinary tract infection among women  and contribute to the spread of disease.xxiv 
As coastal communities grow, sewage can become a threat to local waterways . Demand often 
exceeds available sewage treatment, and much of the sewage is dumped without being treated.xxv 
The right to water and sanita tion is recognized as fundamental to attaining all other human rights. 
Globally, however, 2.1 billion people do not have access to safe drinking water at home, 2.3 billion 
do not have basic sanitation and 1 billion practice open defecation. Women and girls  are 
disproportionately affected by the lack of access to basic water, sanitation and hygiene facilities, 
as they play a larger role relative to men in water, sanitation and hygiene activities, including in 
agriculture and domestic labor . This situation ha s implications for gender equality and 
empowerment.  [World Health Organizationxxvi] 
Mainstreaming gender -related actions for water and sanitation infrastructure identifies and 
responds to the needs of women and girls and increases education attainment rates and 
employment rates for all. Improving access to water and sanitation is critical to alleviate the time 
poverty of women and girls. Promoting the role of women in water governance and management, 
capacity building with women’s involvement, and increasing women’s participation in local 
institutions such as water users’ organizations can also advance women’s leadership and decision -
making opportuniti es. 
Another issue for coastal communities coastal is  land -based plastic waste  in the oceans  due to 
lacking solid waste management infrastructure.  Coastal waters and shorelines in many regions are 
accumulation zones for marine plastic litter, being the receiving body for land -based plastics and 
the zone where fisheries, aquaculture, commercial sh ipping and other maritime activities are 
concentrated.  
Women often work as recycling collectors either  individually or alongside male family members. 
Later in the value chain, there are few waste businesses that are  women -owned or operated . Much 
of female  participation is  limited to informal work/ unregulated employment . The nature of 
participation at  processing and recycling factories is also unregulated and women are engaged 
primarily as daily  wage workers.  The formal waste collection process is  dominated by men . 
The waste sector is  a largely unregulated sector facing social stigma and economic deprivation. In 
addition to these  occupational challenges, women in the waste sector must deal with the 
competing demands from  domestic and childcare respo nsibilities. The physical nature of some of 
the tasks involved as well as  health and safety issues add another layer of concern for women 
engaged in waste management.xxvii 
Gender mainstreaming in the solid waste management sector can considerably improve wome n’s 
well -being because of the associated impacts on health and time poverty. As in the case of the 
water and sanitation sector, solid waste management at the household level is a burden that often 
falls on women’s shoulders. Furthermore, as primary caregiv ers, women are often responsible for 
family members who fall ill due to unsanitary . Due to the gendered responsibility of women for 
household work, women have been most burdened with the inadequacy of the municipal waste 
collection and management services,  with the urgency of the problem increasing for those who 
live in poor and informal settlements. The rise of diseases linked to poor waste management also 
Page 120


---
*Page 125*
---

further increases the care work of women who look after sick children and family members, giving 
them  less time to spend in other work that generates income or other benefits for themselves and 
the community.xxviii 
 
Specific Project Assessment  
Women’s Activism around Plastic Marine Pollution in Coastal Yucatán, Mexicoxxix 
Project description:  
This case study draws from the experiences of the coastal town of Celestún in Yucatán, Mexico 
where increasing immigration from inland areas, unplanned urbanization, overfishing and 
unsustainable tourism have degraded and eroded much of the beach and disru pted the coastal 
wetlands ecosystems.  The crisis has also driven the growth of women -led grassroots organizations 
which play an active role in local waste management and plastics recycling.  
Gender responsive activities of the project : 
These community -base d organizations challenge exclusionary gender norms by increasing 
women’s participation in sustainable urban development, and their efforts have significantly 
raised community awareness on the link between solid waste management, health, empowerment 
and we llbeing in the coastal wetlands.  
The women’s recycling group, Chen Kole ‘Lob (meaning “only women” in Yucatec Maya) is a group 
in Celestún that emerged out of women’s concern for public health, environmental protection, and 
urban sanitation. In 2002, a gro up of 17 women began to organize around waste issues following 
a lecture given at a bi -monthly meeting of Oportunidades, a national development program that 
gave small stipends to poor women with children who regularly attend school. The talk focused 
on th e practice of throwing garbage in the wetlands, and the health risks linked to garbage in 
coastal environments. Every two weeks, women from the group collect bottles and other 
recyclable materials from individual residences, and bring them to the collectio n centre, where a 
truck picks them up and brings the items to a larger recycling facility in another town. The group 
gets the going rate for recyclables (about 2 pesos per kilogram), half of which they pay out to the 
individual residents. At least two tons  of plastic containers are collected every two weeks, as well 
as increasing amounts of scrap metals, cardboard, and recyclable paper . This provides additional 
income for the families and supports children’s education, more independence for women, and 
bette r health due to less pollution.  
Enhancing climate resilience and water security in the Maldivesxxx 
Project description:  
The Maldives is considered one of the most vulnerable countries to the impact of climate change, 
and this is compounded by its dependence on climate -sensitive industries, such as agriculture, 
fisheries and tourism. Freshwater sources in the Maldives are in creasingly jeopardized by 
population growth, erratic rainfall, salinity intrusion and contamination by human waste. To 
support the government of Maldives in fulfilling its major priority to provide safe drinking water 
and safe sewage disposal systems to it s vulnerable communities, UNOPS was tasked with 
delivering the design, construction and construction management of a complete water treatment 
and distribution system on the island of Hinnavaru in Lhaviyani Atoll.  
Gender responsive activities of the project : 
The requirements for this system are that it is affordable, efficient, sustainable and compliant with 
the principles of integrated water resource management. In order to deliver the system and make 
it accessible to everyone, UNOPS carried out an extensiv e gender analysis, analyzing the rural 
context gender dynamics and women’s time use on fresh  water collection for drinking, bathing, 
Page 121


---
*Page 126*
---

cooking and other purposes. Moreover, women were involved in both the consultation process 
and in the project workforce . Th is helped to better reflect women’s needs in the project 
development and improved outcomes  for women that are mostly responsible for fresh water 
collection.  
Drivers of change and specific gender elements to be included in the project activities  
From the fi rst assessment above and based on the illustrated case studies, the GFCR intends to 
address the following issues:  
• Women entrepreneurship across the sustainable infrastructure sector: Since female workers 
are underrepresented in the built infrastructure sec tor, it is important to e mpower female 
entrepreneurship and business opportunities in the infrastructure and waste management 
sector . This can include the promotion of indirect job creation for women through 
infrastructure projects. In waste processing act ivities or waste -to-energy projects, for 
example,  sorting and recycling can generate business opportunities for women.  For the 
waste sector, women shall be provided with more  formalize d work , implying the provision 
of the benefits and stability of formal employment but the flexibility of the 
entrepreneurship model.  
• Support gender -responsive infrastructure design : Address gender inequalities and empower 
women and girls by responding to diverse needs in society during the project design phase  
of infra structure projects as women specific needs or the impacts of infrastructure projects 
on women are often overlooked. Gender -responsive consultation and engagement can help 
identify such needs.  Building  awareness of social rights (access to education, legal recourse 
against crime, access to health care etc.) and a safe means to exercise such rights must be 
made available to women . 
• Promote gender mainstreaming actions in the sustainable infrastructure sector : Consider 
gender aspects  within the planning, delivery and management stages of the infrastructure 
life cycle  to ensure that the infrastructure built is able to guarantee equal quality services . 
• Support the participation of women in waste  management : While addressing the needs of 
the sector as a whole  also  identify women -specific opportunities to improve the status quo 
and improve collection for recycling,  promote a more empowered waste sector, with 
improved quality of life for the women engaged in  waste management . Women can be a  key 
target demographi c for behaviour change especially with regard to  household waste 
management.  Recycling operations can be improved through capacity building, provision 
of equipment/ vehicles,  training and awareness building, financial assistance and health 
insurance  
2.4 Sustainable Development Goal s  
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) make an explicit commitment to gender, both as a 
standalone goal on gender equality and women’s empowerment (SDG 5) as well as a crosscutting 
theme across the SDGs. Among the 230 uniqu e global SDG indicators, 53 explicitly reference 
women, girls, gender, or sex.xxxi  SDG 13 on combating climate change aims to promote mechanisms 
for raising capacity for effective climate change -related planning and management in least 
developed countries, including focusing on women, youth, and local and marginalised 
communities. The following qualitative and quantitative gender sensitive indicators will inform 
the Action Plan. They are derived from a  preliminary  Assessment of SDG 5 and SDG 13 targets  (to 
reflect the Secretariat guidance regarding the GCF SDG 13 focus). In practice SDG 5 is cross cutting  
beyond just SDG 13.    
SDG Targets, Category 1 - Economic:  
Page 122


---
*Page 127*
---

• Recogni ze and value unpaid care and domestic work through the provision of public 
services, infrastructure and social protection policies and the promotion of shared 
responsibility within the household and the family as nationally appropriate.  
• Ensure women’s full  and effective participation and equal opportunities for leadership at 
all levels of decision making in political, economic and public life.  
• Undertake reforms to give women equal rights to economic resources, as well as access to 
ownership and control ove r land and other forms of property, financial services, 
inheritance and natural resources, in accordance with national laws.  
• Enhance the use of enabling technologies including information and communications 
technology, to promote the empowerment of women.   
• Adopt and strengthen sound policies and enforceable legislation for the promotion of 
gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls at all levels.  
• By 2030, achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women and men, 
includi ng for young people and persons with disabilities, and equal pay for work of equal 
value.  
• By 2030, empower and promote the social, economic  and political inclusion of all (within a 
country), irrespective of age, sex, disability, race, ethnicity, origin, religion or economic or 
other status.  
SDG Targets, Category 2 - Social:  
• Eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in the p ublic and private spheres, 
including trafficking and sexual and other types of exploitation.  
• Eliminate all harmful practices, such as child, early and forced marriage and female genital 
mutilation.  
• Ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive healt h and reproductive rights in 
accordance with the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population 
and Development and the Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome documents of their 
review conferences.  
• Protect lab or rights and promote safe and secure working environments for all workers, 
including migrant workers, in particular women migrants, and those in precarious 
employment.  
 
Table 2: Economic Empowerment Goals and Sample Indicators – SDG Assessment1 
Economic 
Empowerment  
Goals  Potential Project Action  Example of gender -responsive indicators  
1) Income and 
equal pay  Closing of gender gaps in 
earnings and income 
generation opportunities  • Qualitative increase in earning and income 
generation opportunities for both women 
and men expressed as income ratio of men 
to women  
1 Refer to the GFCR Gender Action P lan for applicable indicators  
Page 123


---
*Page 128*
---

2) Economic 
assets  Closing of gender gaps in 
asset access, ownership  
and control; Absolute 
increase in women’s 
relative control and 
ownership of an asset  • Number/proportion of women with 
improved access to financial mechanisms 
(equity investment, affordable loans, etc.)  
•  
• Evidence of the type of financial incentives 
used to  encourage women’s entry into the 
market (e.g., finance packages, tax benefits 
and rebates, subsidies, pilot schemes, 
partnerships with financial institutions, the 
private sector or women’s associations)  
3) Quality 
employment  Closing of gender gaps in 
labor  market segregation 
and paid and unpaid 
employment  • Quantifiable increase in targeted and 
diversified employment opportunities for 
women and men (expressed as a ratio) 
coupled with support for reproductive 
responsibilities  
 
Table 3: Social Empowerment Goals and Sample Indicators – SDG Assessment2 
Social Empowerment  
Goals  Potential Project Action  Example of gender -
responsive indicators  
1) Individual and community 
empowerment including 
meaningful participation and 
leadership, Increase in 
women networks and 
organizations and agency  Closing of gender gaps in 
women and men’s 
participations and 
leadership and access to 
networks  
Closing of gender gaps in 
leadership positions and 
decision making at the 
individual, household, 
community and political 
level  
 • Quantitative indicators that 
measure targets and quotas 
for women’s participation and 
leadership in community, 
including their a ccess to 
social networks  
•  
• Quantifiable increase in the 
percentage of women making 
decisions on behalf of their 
families, communities and 
government  
2) Applied skills and training  Closing of gender gaps 
and stereotypes in 
women’s and men’s 
access to applied skills 
and training  • Qualitative and verifiable 
increase in women’s and 
men’s relative confidence, 
skills and know -how, e.g., on 
appraising investments and 
developing projects  
•  
• Evidence of the type of 
incentives designed to recruit 
2 Refer to the GFCR Gender Action P lan for applicable  indicators  
Page 124


---
*Page 129*
---

women, increase t heir 
capacity and provide career 
development in targeted 
sector agencies and service 
providers  
3) Better  health  and safety  Improve health and 
safety outcomes  • Number of beneficiaries, i.e., 
people with improved living 
and occupational safety  
conditions, including women 
and women -headed 
households  
4) Access to infrastructure 
services and technologies  Closing of gender gaps in 
access to infrastructure 
services  • Quantifiable increase in 
women’s control over, 
decisions in, related skills 
development and access to 
infrastructure services  
 
3. Fund  Application  
The Assessment provides a frame for the gender -related elements of the GFCR  investment 
portfolio, as well as for the Fund itself. Specifically, the Assessment has been used to inform the 
following areas within the Fund :   
• Governance – including roles and r esponsibilities to achieve GFCR gender equity targets;  
• Competencies and capacity development – including ESMS Manager, gender specialist(s), 
SDG specialist, and related training;  
• Resource allocation, accessibility and budget – at both GFCR and invested pro ject level , the 
Gender Action Plan has dedicated budget allocated for its implementation ; 
• Operational procedures – at both GFCR and invested project level. This includes mandatory 
inclusion of a gender assessment as part of ESIA (Environmental & Social Impact 
Assessment) for each project, and gender -responsive stakeholder consultation 
requirements and safeguards, based on the Gende r policy as well as monitoring and 
evaluation; and  –  
• Knowledge generation and communications.  
 
Gender -related outputs at Fund 
level  GFCR  Fund -level targets  Status 
07-202 1 
Gender and social inclusion 
policies in place at fund level  Endorsement of gender and 
social inclusion policy by fund 
management committee  
 100%  
Gender procedures and checklists 
incorporated in fund’s ESMS  Comprehensive ESMS with 
updated gender procedures  100%  
Recruitment of women in projects  Aspire for gender p arity in GFCR 
project team, at least 40% of 
employees will be female  
including senior and decision -
making positions  TBD   
Page 125


---
*Page 130*
---

 
Recruitment of women in fund 
capacity -building, field and 
monitoring teams  
 Aspire for gender parity, at least 
25% of project field / monitoring 
team members will be female  TBD  
Ensure GFCR  internal annual 
reporting includes requirements, 
targets and reportable progress  
 100% annual compliance with 
gender reporting at fund level  TBD  
Dedicate necessary finances and 
human resource s to implement 
the Gender Policy and Gender 
Strategy  
 ESMS Manager , gender specialist  
and SDG Specialists on GFCR 
team   
Dedicate resources required to 
build and strengthen staff capacity 
related to knowledge 
management, learning  
 Line item in budget for gender -
related capacity building within 
GFCR team   
Appoint gender 
specialist/consultants as needed  
 Gender specialist available to 
GFCR team as needed, additional 
project consultants hired as 
needed   
Audit and verification teams have 
the expertise to review and assess 
project gender responsiveness 
and impact  
 Gender training programme for 
audit and verification teams   
Table 1 : GFCR Fund -level Assessment  
 
3.1 Safeguards and Consultation  
All projects considered by GFCR must have  mandatory gender -sensitive and gender -responsive  
procedures and strategies that adhere to  the Gender policy which is aligned with internationally 
acknowledges standards and best practices . These guidelines, aligned with the GFCR ESMS, 
require project developers to complete gender -sensitive  safeguards assessment and stakeholder 
consultations as part of initial project design and feasibility. This is  a mandatory foundational 
requirement  that  applies to all GFCR projects , which  include s:   
 
Social Safeguarding Principles  
3.1 Principle 1 – Human Rights  
3.2 Principle 2 – Gender Equality and Women’s Rights  
3.3 Principle 3 – Community Health, Safety and Working Conditions  
3.4 Principle 4 – Indigenous Peoples, Displacement and Resettlement  (not 
applicable, Cat B)  
3.4.1 Sites of Cultural and Historical Heritage  
3.4.2 Forced Eviction and Displacement  
3.4.3 Land Tenure and Other Rights  
3.4.4 Indigenous Peoples  
3.5 Principle 5 – Corruption  
Page 126


---
*Page 131*
---

Econom ic Safeguarding Principles  
3.6 Principle 6 – Economic Impacts  
3.6.1 Labor  Rights  
3.6.2 Negative Economic Consequences  
 
The gender safeguards can be found in the GFCR Gender Policy (Annex 2) and are applicable for 
all projects. In addition, country and sect or specific gender issues derived from gender analysis 
will be also assessed. These may vary from project to project.  
 
The gender safeguards  also  address es gender -based violence against women.  Hence, as part of 
the safeguards assessment, risks of s exual harassment and/or any forms of violence against 
women will be assessed.   
To prevent gender -based violence, the developer shall implement policies, measures, a grievance 
mechanism, and incident r eporting. Incidents shall be monitored and report ed on a regular basis.  
Remedial actions have to be taken immediately. To grant equitable and effective access to 
grievance redress mechanisms, the GFCR has multiple grievance mechanisms in place. The GFCR 
grievance mechanisms can be found in Annex 11 and 12 of the ESMS . 
 
3.2 Gender -Responsive Stakeholder Engagement and Consultation  
Stakeholder Consultation provides a critical opportunity for a project developer to engage with 
stakeholders in a gender sensitive manner and to share and promote understanding about and a 
sense of ownership of the project. This may include exchanging view s on risks (and mitigation), 
impacts, benefits and opportunities. It provides a valuable entry point to improve the project 
design and outcomes and help the project developer to identify and control external risks.  
Stakeholder engagement and consultation shall consider different gender relationships and roles. 
Women and men typically fulfill different roles and responsibilities depending on the context and 
the country. Virtually no role is always exclusively performe d by just women or men. Because 
women often are assigned lower societal status relative to men, women tend to have lower 
confidence, less influence and less involvement in the design, decisions and engagement with 
projects. In developing a project, “taking  gender issues into account would require that local 
stakeholder consultation processes reach a wide range of community representatives in ways that 
ensure equal and effective participation of women and men in consultation, and that gender issues 
are fully  factored into comprehensive social and environmental impact assessments.”xxxii 
Engagement  
Gender -responsive stakeholder engagement should take place before and throughout project 
implementation so it can inform the design of the project to ensure that women can participate in 
the design phase. In addition, engagement should be promoted throughout the implementation of 
the project to address gender needs on a continuous basis. Gender -responsive stakeholder 
engagement shall include the following activities:  
1. Und erstand the gender context to identify engagement approaches:  
• Engage with the community, in particular women, to determine the best way to 
communicate with them.  
• Engage with women in focus group settings facilitated by a female to capture views and 
informa tion.  
• Use participatory techniques to capture gender specific information e.g. gender 
Page 127


---
*Page 132*
---

matrices, seasonal calendars, ranking, community mapping/transect walks.  
• Identify and engage with women’s cooperatives/groups. Where they do not exist, 
support the establ ishment of such groups.  
 
2. Undertake stakeholder mapping/analysis and determine gender context : 
• Includes identifying the key stakeholders and mapping and prioritizing them based on 
level of impact, influence and interest.  
• Data gathering through community lea ders, government representatives and high -level 
online research to understand the gender context (e.g. gender indicators/data on 
education, labor force participation, health, agency/decision making and traditional and 
cultural practices).  
 
3. Develop engagement methods for stakeholder groups : 
• Establish culturally appropriate engagement methods (including on the grievance 
mechanism if relevant) for each stakeholder group with consideration for culture and 
gender, based on the gender context.  
• Engage with  stakeholder groups on approaches determined to gather feedback and 
suggestions.  
 
4. Document approach in a Stakeholder Engagement Plan  
I. Develop a Stakeholder Engagement Plan that includes stakeholder mapping/analysis, 
gender context and engagement methods.  
 
Consultation  
The following considerations should be made that relate to gender equality in Stakeholder 
Consultation  planning:  
- What measures and actions need to be put in place to ensure equal gender participation in 
Stakeholder Consultations. How should inputs and insights from women and men be sought 
out, listened to, considered, addressed and documented?  
- Is it necessary to make  any specific arrangements to ensure that all constituencies are engaged 
in the consultation arrangements to not only foster inclusive participation of women but also 
avoid potentially negative consequences? (for example, speak to women and men separately;  
have focus groups for women and focus groups for men before gathering them together to 
ensure their meaningful participation; adapt timing schedule to men’s and women’s working 
schedules)  
 
Examples of gender -sensitive consultation approaches are:  
- FAO: SEAGA (Socio -economic and Gender Analysis): An approach based on an analysis of socio -
economic patterns and participatory identification of women’s and men’s priorities. The 
objective of the SEAGA ap proach is to close the gaps between what people need and what 
development delivers.  
- CARE Canada: Stakeholder and institution mapping . 
- USAID: When to use a Gender stakeholder analysis . Integrating Gender into climate change 
projects ENERGIA: Elizabeth Cec elski; Soma Dutta (2011); Mainstreaming Gender in Energy 
Projects: A Practical Handbook  
 
3.3 Gender -Responsive Project Design  
It is impossible to integrate gender equality into projects or activities without clearly 
understanding gender issues within the targeted population. Gender -responsive design requires 
a gender analysis to understand the social, economic and political facto rs underlying climate 
change -exacerbated gender inequality, and the potential contribution of women and men to 
Page 128


---
*Page 133*
---

mitigate and adapt to climate change in the project . The analysis also allows  project developers to 
identify  strategies, action and indicators to  better assess how initiatives have engaged with or 
impacted different groups.  
Building on the safeguards and consultations, GFCR will require prospective projects to establish 
and commit to the following mandatory , minimum gender -responsive  requirements :xxxiii 
• Collect, analy ze and apply sex -disaggregated data and using gender indicators to inform 
gender -responsive monitoring, evaluation, reporting and learning on programmatic 
activities ; 
• Conduct gender analyses and applying key issues and recommendations identified to 
inform ge nder -responsive project design, budgeting, staffing, implementation, monitoring 
and evaluation;  
• Analy ze risks that the project may experience or pose, putting measures in place to ensure 
activities do not exacerbate existing gender -related inequalities, i ncluding gender -based 
violence, and seize opportunities to address gender gaps and support empowerment of 
women;  
• Structur e inclusive and gender -sensitive project teams that demonstrate appropriate 
capacities and technical expertise to support gender -respo nsive action;  
• Ensur e women and men have equal opportunities in terms of participation, decision -
making and benefits, throughout the identification, design, implementation, monitoring 
and evaluation of activities;  
• Allocat e sufficient resources for specifi c activities, technical support and/or other actions 
to improve gender equality considerations, including the meaningful engagement of 
diverse stakeholders and beneficiaries;  
 
GFCR may direct and/or support should an expert stakeholder opinion (with a specific emphasis 
on gender and environment expertise) be required to support the gender safeguards assessment 
or project design process, depending on project type, scale and context.  
 
3.4 Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)  
The GFCR has a M&E framework  and processes in place. All GFCR project s must include mandatory 
impact targets, a gender -sensitive f ramework, mandatory, and minimum gender -responsive 
elements. The project’s monitoring framework includes gender -responsive targets and indicators 
to monitor gender equality results against the established baseline.  
M&E occurs at every stage of the project, from initial feasibility , project design, preliminary 
design review, implementation and ongoing performance review . Monitoring is led by the ESMS 
Manager and external consultant s if appropriate .  
Page 129


---
*Page 134*
---

4. Sources  and Endnotes  
• ACDI/VOCA - Gender Analysis, Assessment, and Audit Manual & Toolkit    
• Harvard - Gender Roles Framework or Gender Analysis Framework   
• FAO - Socio -Economic and Gender Analysis Field Handbook   
• Gender Analysis in Natural Resource Management | Land Portal   
• https://www .pacificclimatechange.net/document/gender -analysischecklist -food -security -
and-climate -change -within -programme -or-project    
• How to Conduct a Gender Analysis | USAID ASSIST Project  
• The World Bank’s PPP website wit h collated resources across the following sectors: 
Agriculture, Education, Energy, Health, Information and Communications Technology (ICT), 
Transport, Water and Sanitation. See: http://ppp.worldbank.org/public -private -
partnership/ppp -sector/genderimpacts -ppps/sector -specific -materials/sector -specific -
materials     
• Asian Development Bank (2013) Tool Kit on Gende r Equality Results and Indicators 
https://www.adb.org/documents/tool -kit-gender -equality -resultsand -indicators     
• The Gender Data Portal for the latest sex -disaggr egated data and gender statistics covering 
demography, education, health, economic opportunities, public life and decision -making, and 
agency, see http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/       
• GACC too l see http://cleancookstoves.org/resources/490.html   
• UN Women (2020). COVID -19 and gender: What do we know; what do we need to know?  
https://data.unwomen.org/features/covid -19-and-gender -what -do-we-know -what -do-we-
need -know  
• UN Women COVID -19: Emerging gender data and why it matters  
https://data.unwomen.org/resources/covid -19-emerging -gender -data -and-why -it-matters  
• WHO 2019, data from Na tional Health Workers Accounts for 91 countries for physician data 
and 61 countries for  
nursing data. https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/311314/WHO -HIS-HWF -
Gender -WP1 -2019.1 -eng.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y  
• UN Women (2020). Gender equality: Wom en’s rights in review 25 years after Beijing. 
https://www.unwomen.org/ - 
• /media/headquarters/attachments/sections/library/publications/2020/gender -equality -
womens -rights -in-reviewen.pdf?la=en&vs=934  
• World bank estimates based on International Labor  Organization, ILOSTAT database. Data 
retrieved in March 1, 2020.  
  
Page 130


---
*Page 135*
---

ANNEX 1 GFCR GENDER ACTION PLAN  
GFCR Gender Action Plan  
Impact Statement: The Global Fund for Coral Reefs – Investment Window (GFCR) seeks to enhance the resilience and adaptive capacity of coral 
reef ecosystems, communities, productive systems and business that depend on them by invest ing in (i) sustainable ocean production, (ii) 
ecotourism and (iii) sustainable infrastructure, while maintaining a gender -responsive framework throughout project design, implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation. The model of the fund is intended to lead t o greater resilience and adaptive capacity of women and girls living in coral 
reef -dependent communities through the attainment of three main impacts:  
1. Empowerment of women and girls  to promote independence and enable them to become agents of change;  
2. Better health outcomes and improved physical and emotional safety of women and girls;  
3. Sustainable livelihoods for women and girls.  
 
Outcome Statement: By demonstrating how to de -risk inves tment (through blended finance, rigorous safeguards, and purposeful gender -
responsive planning and integration) for private capital in additional, high -integrity projects, GFCR seeks to achieve the following gender -responsive 
outcomes:  
• Empowerment  from ac tive inclusion of women in consultation processes and positions of leadership, explicit consideration of gender 
disaggregated -needs in project design, capacity building of women and girls to enable greater roles in environmental stewardship, and 
greater fi nancial independence.  
 
• Formal employment and improved livelihoods for women and girls  through $500  million in blended public/private capital, improved working 
conditions and greater gender parity in pay, and additional incomes that increase the diversity of household incomes, thereby  reducing 
dependence on individual livelihood activities and enhancing  financial resilience which is then less susceptible to periodic shocks.  
 
• Improved health and reduced disease prevalence  from sustainable infrastructure limiting exposure to pollution and waste and improved 
nutrition from enhanced food security and increas ed protein availability.  
 
• Improved capacity of communities to adapt to and cope with shocks to reduce safety risks to women and girls and gender violen ce. 
 
• Increased gender equity, through the GFCR Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), mandato ry project safeguards, gender -
responsive project consultation framework (including expert consultation on including gender -based violence safeguards throughout 
projects, particularly those engaging in high -risk communities), and mandatory gender -responsive  project design (SDG 5).  
 
• Strengthened institutional and regulatory frameworks  on regional and national level through alignment of GFCR projects with national NDCs 
and prevailing gender policies.   
Page 131


---
*Page 136*
---

3 Targets will be  rationali zed by baseline data collected prior to implementation of projects . Activities   Indicators and Targets3 Timeline  Responsibilities and 
Costs   
 
Output(s) Statement:  M&E analysis confirms gender -responsive program design and projects improve empowerment of women and girls 
to promote independence and enable them to become agents of change.  (NOTE: project -level assessments, and hence specific indicators and 
targets, can only be established on ce the GFCR host countries and projects are identified. Thus, indicators and targets have been identified where 
known, or if not, are exemplars.)  
 
Promote women entrepreneurship through capacity building  
 
This may be directly related to:  
• Enhance livelihoods connected to coral reefs (e.g . technology for cold 
storage in coral reef fisheries , shared business centers, etc. ) 
• Support coral reef communities that seek to shift livelihoods to be 
less dependent on coral reefs (e.g. alternative livelihood pr ojects)  
• Build adaptive capacity through enhancing assets (e.g. savings 
groups or microcredit) and agency, networks, learning, and address 
broader interrelated vulnerabilities (e.g. health), or connect to 
strategies to cope with or adapt to risks and threat s related to coral 
reefs (e.g. strategies to cope with salt water intrusion)  
• Provide capacity building for  women -led tourism businesses and 
expansion activities  (e.g. support diversification of  women’s market 
access and fair trade for tourism products and services ) 
• Promote a more empowered waste sector, with improved quality of 
life for the women engaged in waste management  through capacity 
building, provision of equipment/ vehicles, training and awareness 
building, financial assistance and health insurance  
 
 Quantifiable participation of 
women in  all capacity 
building activities , at least 
40%  
 
Quantifiable participation of 
women in capacity building 
activities related to coral 
reef environments, at least 
60%  
 
Quantifiable participation of 
women in capacity building 
activities related to 
entrepreneurship , at least 
60%  
 
 
 
 Years 1 -6 (the 
duration of 
the 
investment 
cycle of 
projects), plus 
any follow -on 
investment 
period 
permitted 
under the 
fund’s LPA  Project Developers 
with support from 
EEs 
 
Costs included as part 
of project budgets  
 
 
Expand business opportunities for women across different sectors  
 
This may be directly related to:  Quantifiable increase in 
targeted and diversified 
business  opportunities for Years 1 -6 (the 
duration of 
the Project Developers 
with support from 
EEs 
Page 132


---
*Page 137*
---

• Support women in diversifying their business  activities  (of particular 
importance in regions where cyclones, overfishing and rising seas 
threaten livelihoods ) and/ or expand business activities vertically 
across th e supply chain (e.g. from pre -harvest, harvest, to post -
harvest in fishing) to generate alternative revenues to fishing  
• Support  women -led tourism businesses and expansion activities  (e.g. 
support diversification of  women’s market access and fair trade for 
tourism products and services ) 
• Promote  expansion of  business opportunities  for women through 
infrastructure projects (e.g.  agricultural activities around the built 
infrastructure to generate additional income ) 
 women and men , at least an 
annual increase of 10% investment 
cycle of 
projects), plus 
any follow -on 
investment 
period 
permitted 
under the 
fund’s LPA   
Costs included as part 
of project budgets  
 
 
Create employment  opportunities for women across different sectors  
 
This may be directly related to:  
• Create job opportunities for women in the sustainable fishing 
industry   
• Create direct and indirect job opportunities for women in ecotourism 
(e.g.  ecotourism or hospitality activities and services such as diving 
schools, restaurants, eco lodges, etc.)  
• Create direct and indirect  opportunities  for women through 
infrastructure projects ( e.g. sorting and recycling as part of the waste 
processing activities or waste -to-energy projects ) 
 Percentage of women in 
direct and indirect jobs 
created , 50%  Years 1 -6 (the 
duration of 
the 
investment 
cycle of 
projects), plus 
any follow -on 
investment 
period 
permitted 
under the 
fund’s LPA  Costs included as part 
of project budgets  
 
Provide training on skills and awareness entrepreneurship, self -
confidence and business opportunities  
 
This may include interventions that  seek to:  
• Conserve coral reef resources  that may directly impact livelihood 
options for women and men  (e.g., Marine Protected Areas)  
• Enhance sustainable management of marine and land activities (e.g., 
fishing, farming) to ensure the sustainability of livelihoods and of 
resources  Qualitative and verifiable 
increase in women’s and 
men’s relative confidence, 
skills and know -how, e.g., on 
appraising investments and 
developing projects , at least 
an annual increase of 10%  Years 1 -6 (the 
duration of 
the 
investment 
cycle of 
projects), plus 
any follow -on 
investment 
period 
permitted Project Developers 
with support from 
EEs 
 
Costs included as part 
of project budgets  
 
 
Page 133


---
*Page 138*
---

• Provide women with training and formal education to improve the 
efficiency, profitability and sustainability of their business activities  
in the fishing sector and to improve  their positions in the post -
harvest activities to increase their bar gaining power  (e.g. education 
on fish preservation, marketing, etc.) . 
• Offer education and training in the  tourism sector to promote 
women into high -level employment  (incl. training on soft skills, 
networking  and high -level training for career progression ) 
• Provide training on waste materials for better sorting and recycling 
in the waste sector  
• Promote women’s participation in investment appraisal and project 
design through providing project -specific skills an d know -how  under the 
fund’s LPA  
Include women in the broader community, civil society organizations, 
and at project level  
 
This may include women’s participation in  decision -making spaces in the 
private sector, public sector tourism bodies, agencies, and trade unions, for 
instance, in the fishing  or tourism  industry.  
This may include activities that seek to:  
• Strengthen  women ’s role to  participate in decision -making processes  
and increase control in the value chain and profit margins  in the 
fishing sector  
• Promote gender equality strategies and policies for th e tourism sector 
through women’s involvement in the private sector, public sector 
tourism bodies, agencies, trade unions , tourism networks and 
cooperatives.  
 Quantitative indicators that 
measure targets and quotas 
for women’s participation 
and leadership in 
community and at project 
level , at least 20% Years 1 -6 (the 
duration of 
the 
investment 
cycle of 
projects), plus 
any follow -on 
investment 
period 
permitted 
under the 
fund’s LPA  Project Developers 
with support from 
EEs 
 
Costs included as part 
of project budgets  
 
 
Promote decision -making of women and financial independence  
 
This may include activities that seek to:  Quantifiable increase in the 
percentage of women 
making decisions on behalf 
of their families and Years 1 -6 (the 
duration of 
the 
investment Project Developers 
with support from 
EEs 
 
Page 134


---
*Page 139*
---

• Offer competence training for financial decision -making and educate 
women on their rights  
• Build  networks and connections between women to provide sources 
of peer support  communities , at least an 
annual increase of 10% 
 
Qualitative increase in 
earning an d income 
generation opportunities for 
both women and men 
expressed as income ratio of 
men to women , at least an 
annual increase of 10% cycle of 
projects), plus 
any follow -on 
investment 
period 
permitted 
under the 
fund’s LPA  Costs included as part 
of project budgets  
 
 
Provide access to financial services, infrastructure services and 
technologies to communities and stakeholders  
 
This may include activities that seek to:  
• Promote gender -responsive consultation and engagement on fund 
and project level (incl. promoting GFCR across women networks)  
 Number/proportion of 
women with improved 
access to financial 
mechanisms (equity 
investment, affordable 
loans, etc.) , at least 50%  Years 1 -6 (the 
duration of 
the 
investment 
cycle of 
projects), plus 
any follow -on 
investment 
period 
permitted 
under the 
fund’s LPA  Project Developers 
with support from 
EEs 
 
Costs included as part 
of project budgets  
 
 
 
Output(s) Statement: M&E analysis confirms gender -responsive program design improves  health outcomes and improved physical and 
emotional safety of women and girls. (NOTE: project -level assessments, and hence specific gender indicators and targets, can only  be established 
once the GFCR host countries and projects are identified. Thus, indicators and targets are identified where known, or if not,  are exemplars.)  
 
Improved conditions for better health and the reduction of diseases  
 
This may include activities that seek to:  
• Create awareness and educate on health , safet y, and disease 
prevention to empower individuals and communities to make 
changes that reduce the risk of developing chronic diseases and (Water borne) disease 
prevalence (gender -
disaggregated) , at least an 
annual decrease of 10%  
 
Rates of childhood stunting 
(gender -disaggregated) , at Years 1 -6 (the 
duration of 
the 
investment 
cycle of 
projects), plus 
any follow -on 
investment Project Developers 
with support from 
EEs 
 
Costs included as part 
of project budgets  
 
Page 135


---
*Page 140*
---

other morbidities  (e.g. a wareness campaigns that are aimed to 
reduce open defecation, promote personal hygiene, support healthy 
nutrition for child growth and development , etc.)  
• Interventions that address women’s vulnerability  related to health 
and safety risks in a participatory approach, involving the women  
concerned and based on an examination of the local  situation  to 
define gender -responsive solutions  
 least an annual decrease of 
10%  period 
permitted 
under the 
fund’s LPA  
Reduction of gender -based violence among  project stakeholders  
 
This may include activities that seek to:  
 
• Create awareness of sexual harassment and gender -based violence 
(particularly in the tourism industry ) and develop appropriate 
instruments to reduce harassment and violence  
 Number of reported gender -
based violence incidents 
(gender -disaggregated) (e.g. 
through grievance 
mechanism) , below 10% of 
incidents reported shall be 
gender -related  Years 1 -6 (the 
duration of 
the 
investment 
cycle of 
projects), plus 
any follow -on 
investment 
period 
permitted 
under the 
fund’s LPA  Project Developers 
with support from 
EEs 
 
Costs included as part 
of project budgets  
 
Provide healthy and safe (work) environment  
 
This may include activities that seek to:  
 
• Develop gender -responsive measures (e.g.  Personal Protective 
Equipment for women)  
 Number of health and safety 
incidents (gender -
disaggregated) , at least an 
annual decrease of 10%  Years 1 -6 (the 
duration of 
the 
investment 
cycle of 
projects), plus 
any follow -on 
investment 
period 
permitted 
under the 
fund’s LPA  Project Developers 
with support from 
EEs 
 
Costs included as part 
of project budgets  
 
Implement stakeholder outreach and engagement activities related to 
the above supported by proper safeguards and expert input  
 Qualitative assessment of 
engagement activities 
results , at least medium Years 1 -6 (the 
duration of 
the Project Developers 
with support from 
EEs 
Page 136


---
*Page 141*
---

This may inc lude activities, such as:  
• Gender -responsive consultation and engagement can help identify 
project design needs  
• Consider gender aspects within the planning, delivery  and 
management stages of the infrastructure life cycle to ensure that the 
infrastructure built is able to guarantee equal quality services  
 satisfaction from 
stakeholder participants  investment 
cycle of 
projects), plus 
any follow -on 
investment 
period 
permitted 
under the 
fund’s LPA   
Costs included as part 
of project budgets  
 
 
Output(s) Statement:  M&E analysis confirms gender -responsive program design and projects to enhance sustainable livelihoods for 
women and girls.  (NOTE: project -level assessments, and hence specific indicators and targets, can only be established once the GFCR host 
countries and pr ojects are identified. Thus, indicators and targets have been identified where known, or if not, are exemplars.)  
 
Provide capacity building and applied skills and training for project 
developers and project stakeholders to include women in the 
workforce  
 
This may include activities that seek to:  
• For the waste sector, women shall be provided with more  formalize d 
work , implying the provision of the benefits and stability of formal 
employment but the flexibility of the entrepreneurship model.  
• Build awareness of social rights (access to education, legal recourse 
against crime, access to health care etc.) and a safe means to exercise 
such rights . 
• Provide skills training and equipment to increase the female 
workforce  
 Numbe r of gender related 
trainings held , at least one 
per project per year  
 
Percentage  of women 
employed , at least 20%   
 Years 1 -6 (the 
duration of 
the 
investment 
cycle of 
projects), plus 
any follow -on 
investment 
period 
permitted 
under the 
fund’s LPA  Project Developers 
with support from 
EEs 
 
Costs included as part 
of project budgets  
 
 
Promote training and leadership among women  
 
This may be directly related to  activities that:  
• Provide women with training and formal education to improve the 
efficiency, profitability and sustainability of their business activities  
in the fishing sector and to improve  their positions in the post -Percentage  of women that 
participated in a training , at 
least 20%  
 Years 1 -6 (the 
duration of 
the 
investment 
cycle of 
projects), plus Project Developers 
with support from 
EEs 
 
Costs included as part 
of project budgets  
Page 137


---
*Page 142*
---

harvest activities to increase their bar gaining power  (e.g. education 
on fish preservation, marketing, etc.) . 
• Offer education and training in the  tourism sector to promote 
women into high -level employment  (incl. training on  leadership 
skills, soft skills, networking and high -level training for career 
progression ) 
• Provide  leadership  training on waste materials for better sorting and 
recycling in the waste sector  Percentage  of women in 
leadership positions , at least 
20%  any follow -on 
investment 
period 
permitted 
under the 
fund’s LPA   
 
Enable conciliation of family and working life  
 
This may include activities that seek to:  
• Improve women’s work -life balance in tourism and encourage an 
equal division of unpaid care work in tourism communities  through 
awareness building  
• Identify child care opportunities that can support conciliation of 
family and working life  Percentage of contractual 
relationships (temporary vs. 
permanent and full -time vs. 
part -time) , at least 70% of 
female employees shall have 
a permanent contract that is 
either full or part -time  Years 1 -6 (the 
duration of 
the 
investment 
cycle of 
projects), plus 
any follow -on 
investment 
period 
permitted 
under the 
fund’s LPA  Project Developers 
with support from 
EEs 
 
Costs included as part 
of project budgets  
 
 
Demonstrate through gender -responsive program design and 
resulting data that livelihoods c an be improved for women  
 
This may include activities that seek to:  
• Create awareness on the gender pay gap and support women 
network to address the issue  
 Wages (gender -
disaggregated data) , 80% 
women shall have a wage 
above the minimum wage  
 
Percentage of gender pay 
gap, less than 10%  Years 1 -6 (the 
duration of 
the 
investment 
cycle of 
projects), plus 
any follow -on 
investment 
period 
permitted 
under the 
fund’s LPA  Project Developers 
with support from 
EEs 
 
Costs included as part 
of project budgets  
 
 
 
 
Page 138


---
*Page 143*
---

Output(s) Statement: Establish GFCR fund -level gender equity process and outcomes  
Gender and social inclusion policies in place at fund level  Endorsement policy by fund 
management committee, 
including a gender -
responsive results 
framework  Years 1 -12 
(the duration 
of the GFCR 
fund)  ESMS Manager, 
Accredited Entity, 
Executing Agency  
 
Costs included in 
GFCR fund level 
budget  
 
Recruitment of women in projects; recruitment of women in development 
and implementation of fund capacity -building, field and monitoring teams  Aspire to parity, at least 
40% of fund (including 
project planning and design 
teams) and 25% of field 
employees w ill be female  Years 1 -12 
(the duration 
of the GFCR 
fund)  ESMS Manager, 
Accredited Entity, 
Executing Agency  
 
Costs included in 
GFCR fund level 
budget  
 
Recruitment of women in projects; recruitment of women in development 
and implementation of fund capacity -building, field and monitoring teams  Aspire to parity, at least 
40% of fund (including 
project planning and design 
teams) and 25% of field 
employees w ill be female  Years 1 -12 
(the duration 
of the GFCR 
fund)  ESMS Manager, 
Accredited Entity, 
Executing Agency  
 
Costs included in 
GFCR fund level 
budget  
 
Ensure GFCR internal annual reporting includes indicators with 
corresponding requirements, gender -disaggregated data and targets to 
ensure reportable progress  Annual compliance with 
gender reporting at fund 
level  Years 1 -12 
(the duration 
of the GFCR 
fund)  ESMS Manager, 
Accredited Entity, 
Executing Agency  
 
Costs included in 
GFCR fund level 
budget  
 
Page 139


---
*Page 144*
---

Hire dedicated human resources to implement the Gender Action Plan, with 
allocated additional funds provided to ensure flexibility and security as new 
learning comes up within implementation  ESMS Manager, gender  and 
SDG specialists in GFCR 
team  
 Years 1 -12 
(the duration 
of the GFCR 
fund)  ESMS Manager, 
Accredited Entity, 
Executing Agency  
 
Costs included in 
GFCR fund level 
budget  
 
Dedicate resources to build and strengthen staff capacity related to 
knowledge manag ement, learning; Appoint gender specialist/consultants as 
needed to respond to new capacity needs . The gender special can support 
GFCR with gender analysis, assessment, engagement, defining measures, 
monitoring key indicators against targets, and to engage  with stakeholders 
on gender -related topics.  Line item in budget for 
gender -related capacity 
building within GFCR team  
 Years 1 -12 
(the duration 
of the GFCR 
fund)  ESMS Manager, 
Accredited Entity, 
Executing Agency  
 
Costs included in 
GFCR fund level 
budget  
 
If appropriate and deemed necessary, audit and verification teams to review 
and assess project gender responsiveness and impact  TBD  Years 1 -12 
(the duration 
of the GFCR 
fund)  ESMS Manager, 
Accredited Entity, 
Executing Agency  
 
Costs included in 
GFCR fund level 
budget  
 
 
Output(s) Statement: Implement project -level gender assessments and action plans (NOTE: project -level assessments, and hence specific 
gender indicators and targets, can only be established once the GFCR host countries and projects are identified. Thus, indicators and targets are 
identified where known, or if not, are exemplars.)  
 
Refer to the GFCR Gender Policy to comply with the requirements and 
guidelines. The following steps should be implemented on projec t level:  
1. Understand the GFCR Policy, its scope, and application  
2. Apply gender related safeguarding principles  
3. Conduct gender -responsive stakeholder consultation  
4. Conduct gender analysis and baseline determination  100% of projects in the fund 
have to  comply with the 
GFCR Gender Policy  Years 1 -6 (the 
duration of 
the 
investment 
cycle of 
projects), plus Project Developers 
with support from 
EEs 
 
Costs included as part 
of project budgets  
Page 140


---
*Page 145*
---

5. Develop gender commitment statement  
6. Define go als and measure change  
7. Establish gender actions  
 
In addition:  
• Reference and align with country NDC and prevailing gender policy  
• Develop the Monitoring and Evaluation mechanism and process  
 any follow -on 
investment 
period 
permitted 
under the 
fund’s LPA  
 
Output(s) Statement: Gender -sensitive safeguarding and stakeholder consultation is implemented, leading to gender -responsive project 
design and development.  
 
Gender -responsive considerations (Gender Equality and Women’s Rights) 
will be assessed during project design and stakeholder consultation in 
addition to other project safeguarding, including the following categories:  
• Human Rights  
• Community Health, Safety  and Working Conditions  
• Indigenous Peoples, Displacement and Resettlement  
• Corruption  
• Economic Impacts  
• Climate and Energy  
• Water  
• Environment, ecology and land use  100% of projects under 
consideration for 
investment  
 
% women in project design 
and development 
consultations, target 50%  Years 1 -6 (the 
duration of 
the 
investment 
cycle of 
projects), plus 
any follow -on 
investment 
period 
permitted 
under the 
fund’s LPA  Project Developers 
with support from 
EEs 
 
Costs included as part 
of project budgets  
Page 141


---
*Page 146*
---

Timeline  
 
Gender Action Plan Milestones  
 2021  Prior to First Close of Fund  2022  2023  2024  2025  2026  
GFCR gender and social inclusion policies in place  X Gender training at fund level  
 X X X X X 
ESMS Manager and gender framework – including safeguards 
– in place  
 X ESMS revisions  X X    
Revise Gender Action Plan and conduct country/ sector/ 
project  specific gender analysis and action plans  for financed 
activities  X Revise Gender Action Plan and conduct 
country/ sector/ project  specific 
gender analysis and action plans  for 
financed activities  x     
Project -level gender sensitive and gender -responsive 
methodologies  X Refine methodologies as/if needed for 
GFCR implementation  X X    
Fund -wide implementation of gender safeguarding 
methodologies  
• Human Rights  
• Community Health, Safety and Working Conditions  
• Indigenous Peoples, Displacement and Resettlement  
• Corruption  
• Economic Impacts  
• Climate and Energy  
• Water  
• Environment, ecology and land use  
 X Methodology modification, as /if 
needed for GFCR implementation  X X X X X 
Monitoring, Verification and Reporting (MRV) methodologies  X Refine MRV methodology as/if needed 
for GFCR implementation  X     
Gender -related resource development  
   X X    
Gender -related training development  
   X X    
Page 142


---
*Page 147*
---

Gender -disaggregated project data, reporting and fund -level 
reporting      X X X 
 
 
Process and content for developing gender analysis and action plans  
Activities  Implementation  
Process during 
the 
development 
of country 
level gender 
analysis and 
action plans  Country level gender analysis and action plans  will seek to align the project to achieve the gender related objectives of the GFCR 
Action Plan . An analysis of the  gender equality landscape and d ata relevant to the host country and in the targeted sector(s), will be 
conducted and shall include the following activities : 
• Desk research and review of existing literature : Initial research will help to understand the country context and existing 
gender -related issues in the country and sector.  
• Gender -responsive Stakeholder Engagement : Stakeholder engagement shall further help understand the local context and 
project specific gender issues that should be addres sed. In addition, it can serve to identify measures to achieve the intended 
outcomes included in the GFCR Gender Action Plan . Gender -responsive stakehol der engagement shall include the following 
activities:  
Understand the gender context to identify engagement approaches:  
• Engage with the community, in particular women, to determine the best way to communicate with them.  
• Engage with women in focus group set tings facilitated by a female to capture views and information.  
• Use participatory techniques to capture gender specific information e.g. gender matrices, seasonal calendars, ranking, 
community mapping/transect walks.  
• Identify and engage with women’s cooperatives/groups. Where they do not exist, support the establishment of such 
groups.  
Undertake stakeholder mapping/analysis and determine gender context:  
• Includes identifying the key stakeholders and mapping and prioritizing them based on level of impac t, influence and 
interest.  
• Data gathering through community leaders, government representatives and high -level online research to understand 
the gender context (e.g. gender indicators/data on education, labor force participation, health, agency/decision ma king 
and traditional and cultural practices).  
Develop engagement methods for stakeholder groups:  
• Establish culturally appropriate engagement methods (including on the grievance mechanism if relevant) for each 
stakeholder group with consideration for cultur e and gender, based on the gender context.  
• Engage with stakeholder groups on approaches determined to gather feedback , suggestions , and measures to achieve 
the outcome objectives of the GFCR Gender Action Plan.  
Page 143


---
*Page 148*
---

Document approach in a Stakeholder Engagement  Plan  
• Develop a Stakeholder Engagement Plan that includes stakeholder mapping/analysis, gender context and engagement 
methods.  
• Gender -responsive Project Design  and Action  Plans : The gender analysis , engagement , and safeguards assessment allows 
project developers to identify strategies, action and indicators to better assess how initiatives have engaged with or impact ed 
different groups to inform the action plan. The following activities shall be part of this pr ocess:  
• Collect, analyze and apply sex -disaggregated data and using gender indicators to inform gender -responsive monitoring, 
evaluation, reporting and learning on programmatic activities;  
• Address results derived from the  gender analyses and apply  key issue s and recommendations identified to inform 
gender -responsive project design, budgeting, staffing, implementation, monitoring and evaluation;  
• Analyze risks that the project may experience or pose, putting measures in place to ensure activities do not exace rbate 
existing gender -related inequalities, including gender -based violence, and seize opportunities to address gender gaps 
and support empowerment of women;  
• Structure inclusive and gender -sensitive project teams that demonstrate appropriate capacities an d technical expertise 
to support gender -responsive action;  
• Ensure women and men have equal opportunities in terms of participation, decision -making and benefits, throughout 
the identification, design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of activitie s;  
• Allocate sufficient resources for specific activities, technical support and/or other actions to improve gender equality 
considerations, including the meaningful engagement of diverse stakeholders and beneficiaries;  
• All project -level gender action plans shall support the drivers of change and specific gender elements derived from the 
gender assessment (see Gender Assessment for sector specific elements). This includes on a high -level:  
o Support women empowerment and entrepreneursh ip 
o Skills training and capacity building for women  
o Promote decent work for women  
o Support women’s needs in the community and civil society  
• Monitoring and Evaluation : All GFCR projects must include mandatory impact targets, a gender -sensitive framework, 
mandatory, and minimum gender -responsive elements. The project’s monitoring framework includes gender -responsive 
targets and indicators to monitor gender equality resul ts against the established baseline.  
 
Envisaged 
stakeholder 
consultations 
(who will be Gender -responsive stakeholder engagement should take place before and throughout project implementation so it can inform the 
design of the project to e nsure that women can participate in the design phase. In addition, engagement should be promoted 
throughout the implementation of the project to address gender needs on a continuous basis. The following considerations shou ld be 
made that relate to gender e quality in Stakeholder Consultation planning:  
- What measures and actions need to be put in place to ensure equal gender participation in Stakeholder Consultations. How shou ld 
Page 144


---
*Page 149*
---

engaged and 
how)  inputs and insights from women and men be sought out, listened to, considered, addressed and documented?  
- Is it necessary to make  any specific arrangements to ensure that all constituencies are engaged in the consultation arrangements 
to not only foster inclusive participation of women but also avoid potentially negative consequences? (for example, speak to women 
and men separately;  have focus groups for women and focus groups for men before gathering them together to ensure their 
meaningful participation; adapt timing schedule to men’s and women’s working schedules)  
 
Potential stakeholders with gender perspective that shall particip ate during stakeholder consultation:  
- Women from local communities directly or indirectly affected by a project  
- Ministry of Gender, similar government bodies  
- NGOs/CSOs working on gender issues  
- Agri - /aquaculture and fishing organizations  
- Women’s organizatio n 
- Research institutions/universities.  
o  
Key 
information 
that is 
expected to be 
collected  The gender analysis and engagement allows project developers to collect information on:  
- Information on gender country, sector and project specific context (e.g. gender indicators/data on education, labor force 
participation, health, agency/decision making and traditional and cultural practices  
- Feedback, suggestions, and measures to achieve the outcome objectives o f the GFCR Gender Action Plan and make  
- Strategies, actions and indicators  to achieve the gender related outcomes outlined in the GFCR Action Plan and to make context -
specific amendments to the Action Plan  
- Gender indicators to inform gender -responsive moni toring, evaluation, reporting and learning on programmatic activities  
Culturally appropriate engagement methods (including on the grievance mechanism if relevant) for each stakeholder group with  
consideration for culture and gender, based on the gender con text.  
 
Key issues that 
will be 
expected to be 
addressed  Through the country and sector specific gender analysis, the following issues shall be addressed:  
- Gender imbalance and misinformation of gender -equality issues  
- Overcome the misconnect between women and other stakeholders including the project developers  
- Potential risks to achieving programme goals (which is important for effective risk mitigation  strategies)  
- Address stakeholders who are blind to, or oppose, gender equality  
- Accountability when i t comes to gender mainstreaming and equality on project level  
 
 
 
Page 145


---
*Page 150*
---

 
Role of the AE and indicative budget  to implement the Gender Action Plan  
‘The Accredited Entity will make sure to dedicate enough resources to conduct country and sector specific gender analysis and implement the Gender 
Action Plan. All activities are supervised by the ES Manager. If appropriate, external gender specialists are engaged.  
The costs are included in the budget provided in the ESMS (line items capacity building services , fund’s E&S team, engaging external experts). The 
planned total budget for the implementation of activities outlined in the Gender Action Plan amounts to USD 300’000 (excl. tr avel and logistics costs or ES 
Manager salary) for all projects throughout the e ntire fund life. The budget will be adjusted with the revision of the Gender Action Plan.  
The timing of country - and sector -specific gender analysis will be determined prior to project implementation as part of the broader ESG and imp act due 
diligence (see ESMS), which will include gender safeguards to ensure that project design and implementation can be aligned.’
Page 146


---
*Page 151*
---

ANNEX 2 GFCR GENDER POLICY  
 
GFCR Gender Policy  
 
Contents  
SCOPE AND APPLICATION OF THE GENDER POLICY  ................................ ................................ .........  38 
DEFINITIONS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  39 
REQUIREMENTS AND GUIDE LINES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  40 
STEP 1: BASIC CONTEXT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  40 
STEP 2: APPLY SAFEGUARDING PRINCIPLES  ................................ ................................ ....................  40 
STEP 3: CONDUCT STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION  ................................ ................................ ...... 41 
STEP 4: PROJECT GENDER ANALYSIS AND BASELINE DETERMINATION .............................  41 
Step 4.a Develop an applied gender analysis to gather evidence for the project baseline, 
design and development  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  42 
Step 4.b Align the Project with SDG targets  ................................ ................................ ....................  43 
Step 4.c Raise the bar: gender commitment statement  ................................ ..............................  44 
STEP 5: ESTABLISH GOALS AND MEASURE CHANGE  ................................ ................................ .... 45 
Step 5.a Establish Project gender goals (actions): ................................ ................................ ........  45 
Step 5.b Establish meaningful gender performance indicators for the Project  ................  47 
STEP 6: PROJECT CLAIM - GENDER ACTIONS  ................................ ................................ ...................  50 
 
SCOPE AND APPLICATION OF THE GENDER POLICY*  
The main objective of the Gender Policy is to strengthen stakeholders’ responsiveness to the 
multiple, culturally -derived principles of gender equality and women’s empowerment and to 
address and account for the links between gender equality, natural resour ces management and 
environmental sustainability.  
The Gender Policy will apply to all projects in the Global Fund for Coral Reefs (GFCR) and supports 
the GFCR Gender Action Plan and the Environmental Social Management System (ESMS).  
*Please note that the Ge nder Policy is closely aligned with the Gold Standard Gender Equality 
Requirements & Guidelines as this is considered to be best practice and sets rigorous standards.  
  
Page 147


---
*Page 152*
---

DEFINITIONS  
Term  Definition*  
Agency  The capacity to make decisions about one’s own life and act on them to 
achieve a desired outcome, free of violence, retribution, or fear.  
Empowerment  The ability and agency of every woman to shape her own destiny, exercise 
her rights and make her own choices. Women's empowerment has five 
componen ts: women's sense of self -worth; their right to have and to 
determine choices; their right to have access to opportunities and 
resources; their right to have the power to control their own lives, both 
within and outside the home; and their ability to influ ence the direction of 
social change to create a more just social and economic order, nationally 
and internationally.  
Gender  Gender refers to the social, behavioural, and cultural attributes, 
expectations, and norms associated with being male or female.  
Gender 
equality  As enshrined in international and national constitutions and other human 
rights agreements, refers to equal rights, power, responsibilities and 
opportunities for women and men, as well as equal consideration of the 
interests, needs and priorities of women and men.  
Gender equity  Refers to the process of being fair to women and men. To ensure equity, 
measures often need to be taken to compensate (or reduce) disparity for 
historical and social disadvantages that prevent women and men from 
otherwise operatin g on an equitable basis. Equity leads to equality.(UNDP 
2017)  
Gender 
responsive  Refers to the consideration of gender norms, roles and relations and to 
addressing inequality generated by unequal norms, roles and relations 
through remedial action beyond creating gender awareness.  
Gender 
sensitive  Refers to raising awareness and consideration of gender norms, roles and 
relations but does not necessarily address inequality generated by unequal 
norms, roles or relations through remedial action beyond creating gender 
awareness.  
Man  Male human being; a  person assigned a male sex at birth, or a person who 
defines himself as a man. (European Institute for Gender Equality)  
Sex Biological and physiological characteristics that define humans as female 
or male. (European Institute for Gender Equality)  
Social 
inclusion  
 Refers to the process of improving the terms for individuals and groups to 
take part in society, and the process of improving the ability, opportunity, 
and dignity of those disadvantaged on the basis of their identity to take part 
in society.(World Bank)  
Woman  Female human being; a person assigned a female sex at birth, or a person 
who defines herself as a woman. (European Institute for Gender Equality)  
 
* If not otherwise indicated, relevant definitions are drawn and adapted from the GCF gender policy 
or the Annex to the GEF Gender Equality Action Plan (GEAP)  
Page 148


---
*Page 153*
---

REQUIREMENTS AND GUIDELINES  
STEP 1: BASIC CONTEXT  
REQUIREMENTS  
The Gender Policy applies to all projects, serves as a technical guidance on gender, and solidifies 
the operational requirements for stakeholder involvement and partnership in the design, 
implementation, and evaluation of projects.  
ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS:  
1. Does the project reflect the key issues and requirements of Gender Sensitive design and 
imp lementation as outlined in this document? Explain how.  
2. Does the project align with existing country policies, strategies and best practices? Explain 
how.  
Suggestions include:  
- Ensure that the project aligns with the national gender strategy (if host country  has one) or 
other public policy for gender equality and women’s empowerment;  
- Align the project with other national development strategies that promote equal 
opportunities, whether in the intervention region or the sector;  
- Refer to lessons learned from comparable development projects or programmes in the 
region that provide useful context on gender issues, risks and opportunities;  
- Refer to the national report to The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against 
Women  (CEDAW) for data or context relevant to the project.  
- Refer to the World Economic Forum Global Gend er Gap Report   
 
STEP 2: APPLY SAFEGUARDING PRINCIPLES  
REQUIREMENTS  
Apply the gender -related Safeguarding Principles & Requirements outlined in this policy. Country -
level safeguards shall supersede the Gender Policy’s Requirements if they go beyond these 
requirements.  
ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS:  
3. Does the project address the questions raised in this document? Explain how.  
This may direct/support whether an expert stakeholder opinion (with a specific emphasis on 
gender and environment expertise) is required to support the gender safeguards assessment 
process depending on project type, scale and context.  
The gender -related Safeguarding Principles & Requirements include the following:  
- The Project shall not directly or indirectly reinforce gender -based discrimination and shall 
not lead to/contribute to adverse impacts on gender equality and/or the situation of 
women. Specificall y, this shall include (not exhaustive):  
a) Sexual harassment and/or any forms of violence against women – address the multiple 
risks of gender -based violence, including sexual exploitation or human trafficking.  
b) Slavery, imprisonment, physical and mental drudgery, punishment or coercion of 
women and girls.  
c) Restriction of women’s rights or access to resources (natural or economic).  
Page 149


---
*Page 154*
---

d) Recognize women’s ownership rights regardless of marital status – adopt project 
measures where possible to support to women’s a ccess to inherit and own land, homes, 
and other assets or natural resources  
- Projects shall apply the principles of non -discrimination, equal treatment, and equal pay 
for equal work, specifically:  
a) Where appropriate for the implementation of a Project, paid,  volunteer work or 
community contributions will be organised to provide the conditions for equitable 
participation of men and women in the identified tasks/activities.  
b) Introduce conditions that ensure the participation of women or men in Project activities  
and benefits based on pregnancy, maternity/paternity leave, or marital status.  
c) Ensure that these conditions do not limit the access of women or men, as the case may 
be, to project participation and benefits.  
- The project shall refer to the country’s nation al gender strategy or equivalent national 
commitment to aid in assessing gender risks.  
- Based on the responses to assessment questions above, it may be required that the project 
seek the input of an Expert Stakeholder(s) and to include their recommendations  in the 
project design.  
STEP 3: CONDUCT STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION  
REQUIREMENTS  
Apply Stakeholder Consultation & Engagement Procedure, Requirements & Guidelines in 
accordance with the GFCR Stakeholder Consultation & Engagement Policy and take note of the 
gender guidelines.  
ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS:  
4. Does the project apply a Stakeholder Consultation & Engagement Procedure, Requirements 
& Guidelines in accordance with the GFCR Stakeholder Consultation & Engagement Policy ? 
Explain how.  
Steps 2 and 3 together provide the Project Developer with a consolidated assessment of the Project's 
purpose, who the Project will engage with and ensures against the project contributing to any further 
harm.  
STEP 4: PROJECT GENDER ANALYSIS AND BASELINE DETERMINATION  
Integrate Steps 1 -3 into the gender analysis and establish project baseline. Inputs from Steps 1 -3 
notably the stakeholder consultations and safeguards assessment will feed into the Gender analysis.  
Gender analysis is a systematic way to identify context -specific key issues and factors that 
contribute to gender inequalities. It may consist of primary or secondary research, or a 
combination of both. It is impossible to integrate gender equality into pr ojects or activities without 
clearly understanding gender issues within the targeted population. A gender analysis enables 
project developers to understand the implications of gender on climate change mitigation, 
adaptation and disaster risk reduction inte rventions (and vice -versa), and design appropriate 
interventions that can benefit all members of a community. It also allows the project developers 
to develop indicators to better assess how initiatives have engaged with or impacted different 
groups.  
Gend er analysis explores individual, relational and structural factors, within both public and 
private spheres, as individuals are likely to experience gender differently, or hold different roles, 
Page 150


---
*Page 155*
---

within different groups or relationships. Gender analysis attem pts to answer at least three key sets 
of questions:  
- What are the gender -based inequalities, discriminations and rights denials in each context? 
How do these issues intersect with other discrimination factors such as age, ethnicity, 
disability, class, etc. ?  
- How will gender relations influence the effectiveness and sustainability of the project 
activity or result? How will project processes and activities be designed to reduce 
inequalities and increase equality?  
- How will the proposed results affect the rel ative status of women and men? Will they 
exacerbate or reduce inequalities?  
Step 4.a Develop an applied gender analysis to gather evidence for the project baseline, design and 
development  
REQUIREMENTS  
Gender -responsive projects require a gender analysis to  understand the social, economic and 
political factors underlying climate change -exacerbated gender inequality, and the potential 
contribution of women and men to mitigate and adapt to climate change.  
ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS:  
Conduct a gender analysis that sh ould, at minimum, explain the following considerations:  
5. How does the project concept and description actively contribute to climate security and 
sustainable development in gender -responsive ways? Refer Step 4 (b) below to answer this 
question.  
6. How does t he project gender analysis effectively differentiate how men and women, separately 
and together, contribute to and benefit from climate security and sustainable development? 
Towards adaptation and mitigation or both?  
7. Is there a baseline description which includes both gender equality and women’s economic 
empowerment factors? Please provide. This will help in identifying relevant SDG target in step 
4(b) below.  
Examples of questions to guide Gender Analysis:  
- Are there gaps in development outcomes that males and females experience in the areas of 
human endowment, formal employment, ownership and control of assets and voice and 
agency?  
- Are there design and implementation gaps relevant to the project goals and/ or key issues 
such as safety, security, employment and entrepreneurship that affect men and women 
differently?  
- Are there gaps between males and females, especially in light of the relevant country and 
sector?  
- Are the results of stakeholder consultations with men and women and/or NGOs that work 
with these g roups included in the gender analysis?  
- Does the gender analysis draw on available and current quantitative and qualitative data?  
- Does the analysis consider the potential negative/adverse impact of project activities, for 
instance on women’s unpaid work, time use, access to income or assets, and risk of gender -
based violence?  
- Does the gender analysis consider which specific measures can be or have been identified 
to address gaps?  
Page 151


---
*Page 156*
---

- Are men and women equally involved in making decisions and participatio n processes 
about the project actions and goals? Can women and men equally make their voice heard?  
- Are women and men / girls and boys taken equally into account in the target group? How 
can it be ensured that they derive equitable benefits from the interve ntions?  
- Do measures need to be taken to ensure equitable access to resources and impacts by 
disadvantaged groups (women or men)?  
- Are the actions explicitly broken down as such (for women versus men)? How are they 
distinguished?  
 
RESOURCES:  
To help guide y our Gender Analysis and development of Gender Indicators – consider the 
following:  
- ACDI/VOCA - Gender Analysis, Assessment, and Audit Manual & Toolkit  
- Harvard - Gender Roles Framework or Gender Analysis Framework  
- FAO - Socio -Economic a nd Gender Analysis Field Handbook  
- Gender Analysis in Natural Resource Management | Land Portal  
- Gender Analysis for Sustainable Livelihoods and Participatory Governance in Rwanda  
- https://www.pacificclimatechange.net/document/gender -analysischecklist -food -
security -and-climate -change -within -programme -or-project  
- How to Conduct a Gender Analysis | USAID ASSIST Project  
- Resourced dashboard: https://start.me/p/ELEn9p/inclusive -think -tanks  
-  
Step 4.b Align the Project with SDG targets  
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) make an explicit commitment to gender, both as a 
standalone goal on gender equality and  women’s empowerment (SDG 5) as well as a crosscutting 
theme across the SDGs. SDG 13 on combating climate change aims to promote mechanisms for 
raising capacity for effective climate change -related planning and management in least developed 
countries and s mall island developing states, including focusing on women, youth, and local and 
marginalized communities.  
REQUIREMENTS  
SDG 5 seeks to achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls. It is expected that SDG 
5 will be one of the SDGs that projects align with. Projects can also consider gender related targets 
under SDG 8 and SDG 10:  
- SDG 8: Promote sustained, inclusi ve and sustainable economic growth, full and productive 
employment and decent work for all.  
- SDG 10: Reduce inequality within and among countries.  
ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS:  
8. Can the project address at least one SDG target each from category 1 and category 2? Exp lain 
how.  
SDG Targets, Category 1:  
- Recognize and value unpaid care and domestic work through the provision of public 
services, infrastructure and social protection policies and the promotion of shared 
responsibility within the household and the family as nationally appropriate.  
Page 152


---
*Page 157*
---

- Ensure wome n’s full and effective participation and equal opportunities for leadership at 
all levels of decision making in political, economic and public life.  
- Undertake reforms to give women equal rights to economic resources, as well as access to 
ownership and con trol over land and other forms of property, financial services, 
inheritance and natural resources, in accordance with national laws.  
- Enhance the use of enabling technologies including information and communications 
technology, to promote the empowerment o f women.  
- Adopt and strengthen sound policies and enforceable legislation for the promotion of 
gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls at all levels.  
- By 2030, achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women and men,  
including for young people and persons with disabilities, and equal pay for work of equal 
value.  
- By 2030, empower and promote the social, economic and political inclusion of all (within a 
country), irrespective of age, sex, disability, race, ethnicity, o rigin, religion or economic or 
other status.  
SDG Targets, Category 2:  
- Eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in the public and private spheres, 
including trafficking and sexual and other types of exploitation.  
- Eliminate all harmful p ractices, such as child, early and forced marriage and female genital 
mutilation.  
- Ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights as 
agreed in accordance with the Programme of Action of the International Conference on 
Pop ulation and Development and the Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome 
documents of their review conferences.  
- Protect labour rights and promote safe and secure working environments for all workers, 
including migrant workers, in particular women migra nts, and those in precarious 
employment.  
Step 4.c Raise the bar: gender commitment statement  
The project design, goals and outcomes can now build on available evidence of the gender gaps in 
markets (formal and informal), institutions and households and apply the country -driven 
approach to close persistent gender gaps. This raises the bar beyond li miting the assessment to 
re-stating key gender equality gaps. The project, in understanding and articulating key gender 
constraints as well as opportunities, will seek to narrow gaps, lift constraints, support 
opportunities and feed into a more active and engaged dialogue with stakeholders on key levers 
for sustainable change. The project goals may also go beyond conventional treatment of gender as 
pertaining to average women in the country to consider the full diversity of constraints facing 
women and men as affected by their age, marital status, income levels, ethnicity, physical abilities, 
locations and mobility.  
ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS:  
9. Can the project articulate the statement on gender outcomes? This shall be further reflected in 
the final project claim de tailed in Step 6. The project statement can include the following:  
- Define which measures are in the overall project design and development to achieve gender 
equality results including the mitigation of negative impacts like reinforcing gender 
inequalities  of traditional perceptions of what is male and female.  
Page 153


---
*Page 158*
---

- Outline whether and how the project reduces gender inequalities and/or reinforces gender 
empowerment, and how this affects the achievement of overall project objectives. Refer to 
the chosen SDG targe t in Step 4 (b) above.  
- List gender indicators pertinent to the project scope by which project results will be 
measured. Refer to Step 5 (a) below to identify gender indicators.  
Examples of indicators are given under Step 5.  
STEP 5: ESTABLISH AN ACTION PL AN, GOALS AND MEASURE CHANGE  
Step 5.a Establish  and Action Plan and  Project gender goals (actions):  
Based on the  gender  analysis  and actions taken under 4.c , project developers shall  develop a 
project -level gender action plan, which can address the following : 
• Collect, analyze  and apply sex -disaggregated data and using gender indicators to inform 
gender -responsive monitoring, evaluation, reporting and learning on programmatic 
activities;  
• Address results derived from the  gender analyses and apply  key issues and 
recommendations identified to inform gender -responsive project design, budgeting, 
staffing, implementation, monitoring and evaluation;  
• Analyze risks that the project may experience or pose, putting measures in pla ce to 
ensure activities do not exacerbate existing gender -related inequalities, including gender -
based violence, and seize opportunities to address gender gaps and support 
empowerment of women;  
• Structure inclusive and gender -sensitive project teams that d emonstrate appropriate 
capacities and technical expertise to support gender -responsive action;  
• Ensure women and men have equal opportunities in terms of participation, decision -
making and benefits, throughout the identification, design, implementation, mo nitoring 
and evaluation of activities;  
The project -level action plans shall be formulated in accordance with the GFCR Gender Action 
Plan and corresponding impact, outcome and output statements. The same output indicators 
shall be measured and reported. A template will be provided to the project developers. The ES 
Manager will ensure alignment and report on identified gaps.  
It is also possible to s elect at least one Gender Project Action from tables below to demonstrate 
compliance to the Category 1 SDG Targ ets given in Step 4(B) above.  
Refer to the economic Empowerment Goals and Social Empowerment Goals in the Tables below.  
The economic empowerment goals and social empowerment goals tables below provide guidance 
to project developers on potential gender goal s, actions and indicators. Projects will need to 
demonstrate close alignment to gender goals and choose relevant gender indicators. The list of 
gender responsive indicators given in tables below is not exhaustive and project developers can 
propose their ow n indicators. Realistic project goals need to be set against baselines identified in 
Step 4 (a) above.  
Economic Empowerment Goals Table:4 
ECONOMIC 
EMPOWERMENT 
GOALS  PROJECT ACTION  EXAMPLE OF GENDER -RESPONSIVE 
INDICATORS  
4 Refer to the GFCR Gender Action P lan for applicable indicators  
Page 154


---
*Page 159*
---

1) Income and 
equal pay  Closing of gender gaps in 
earnings and income 
generation opportunities  Qualitative increase in earning and 
income generation opportunities for 
both women and men expressed as 
income ratio of men to women  
2) Economic 
assets  Closing of gender gaps in 
asset access, ownership and 
control; Absolute increase in 
women’s relative control 
and ownership of an asset  • Number/proportion of women with 
improved access to financial 
mechanisms (equity  investment, 
affordable loans, etc.)  
•  
Evidence of the type of financial 
incentives used to encourage 
women’s entry into the market (e.g., 
finance packages, tax benefits and 
rebates, subsidies, pilot schemes, 
partnerships with financial 
institutions, the p rivate sector or 
women’s associations)  
3) Quality 
employment  Closing of gender gaps in 
labour market segregation 
and paid and unpaid 
employment  Quantifiable increase in targeted and 
diversified employment 
opportunities for women and men 
(expressed as a ratio) coupled with 
support for reproductive 
responsibilities  
 
Social Empowerment Goals Table:5 
SOCIAL 
EMPOWERMENT 
GOALS  PROJECT ACTION  EXAMPLE OF GENDER -RESPONSIVE 
INDICATORS  
1) Individual and 
community 
empowerment 
including 
meaningful 
participation and 
leadership, 
Increase in 
women networks 
and 
organizations 
and agency  Closing of gender gaps in 
women and men’s 
participations and 
leadership and access to 
networks  
Closing of gender gaps in 
leadership positions and 
decision maki ng at the 
individual, household, 
community and political 
level  
 • Quantitative indicators that measure 
targets and quotas for women’s 
participation and leadership in 
community, including their access to 
social networks  
•  
Quantifiable increase in the percentage 
of women making decisions on 
behalf of their families, communities 
and government  
2) Applied skills 
and training  Closing of gender gaps and 
stereotypes in women’s and • Qualitative and verifiable increase in 
women’s and men’s relative confidence, 
5 Refer to the GFCR Gender Action P lan for applicable indicators  
Page 155


---
*Page 160*
---

men’s access to applied 
skills and training  skills and know -how, e.g., on appraising 
investments and developing projects  
•  
Evidence of the type of incentives 
designed to recruit women, increase 
their capacity and provide ca reer 
development in targeted sector 
agencies and service providers  
3) Better health 
and safety  Improve health and safety 
outcomes  Number of beneficiaries, i.e., people with 
improved living and occupational safety 
conditions, including women and 
women -head ed households  
4) Access to 
infrastructure 
services and 
technologies  Closing of gender gaps in 
access to infrastructure 
services  Quantifiable increase in women’s control 
over, decisions in, related skills 
development and access to 
infrastructure services  
1) Individual and 
community 
empowerment 
including 
meaningful 
participation and 
leadership, 
Increase in 
women networks 
and 
organizations 
and agency  Closing of gender gaps in 
women and men’s 
participations and 
leadership and access t o 
networks  
Closing of gender gaps in 
leadership positions and 
decision making at the 
individual, household, 
community and political 
level  
 • Quantitative indicators that measure 
targets and quotas for women’s 
participation and leadership in 
community, including their access to 
social networks  
•  
Quantifiable increase in the percentage 
of women making decisions on behalf of 
their families, communities and 
government  
 
Step 5.b Establish meaningful gender performance indicators for the Project  
Gender performance indicators and gender -disaggregated targets can now be incorporated into 
the project results framework.  
Indicators play a crucial role in the gender responsive process throughout the policy cycle. 
Quantitative and qualitative indicators mu st enable ongoing monitoring and evaluation of whether 
the project’s gender equality objectives are being met and assessing the gender effect of project 
activities. If objectives are not being met, it could be essential to re -assess the project strategy an d 
make amendments to ensure improvements. Gender indicators usually express how distant a 
certain situation is from gender equality and are usually expressed as gaps, ratios and generally as 
measures of ‘gender inequalities’. Gender -blind indicators are th ose that do not allow the 
evaluator to uncover gender differences and gender relations in a society because they are not 
collected or cannot be collected in a gender -disaggregated way. For example “community 
participation“ is a gender -blind indicator but i f collected separately for men and for women, can 
become a gender indicators.  
Page 156


---
*Page 161*
---

Economic and social indicators framed by ecological systems need to systematically integrate 
gender -disaggregated and gender -sensitive data throughout – from needs assessments a nd 
baseline indicators to program and project outcome targets, process, results and impact 
assessments.  
- Projects may consider how their gender indicators go beyond economic equity and socio -
political empowerment indicators to include climate -relevant environmental and 
ecological factors, including access to public commons.  
- Projects should indicate if any indicators were developed at the ground level in close and 
continued consultation with communities and women, describing where and ho w. 
As part of project design, determining which indicators to use from social and economic 
empowerment goal charts above can have profound implications for project outcomes. 
Establishing quantitative criteria alone, for instance, can have the unintended effect of excluding 
entire constituencies of project beneficiaries.  
The following questions can guide the project developer to focus on selecting appropriate 
indicators.  
- Will the project positively or negatively engage women and men?  
- Will it imp ose increased time or care burdens on women relative to men?  
- Is there a process in place to track and verify gender impacts? (positive and/or negative)  
- Is there an improvement in the ratio of women to men engaging in the project decisions 
and on -the-ground  monitoring?  
- Is there an increased sense of confidence and empowerment among the project 
beneficiaries?  
REQUIREMENTS  
Define Monitoring Parameters for each of the above Gender Responsive Indicators chosen in Step 
5(a) above.  
Project developers will need to identify relevant monitoring parameters to monitor and evaluate 
the progress towards equality enabled by the project as reflected in chosen indicator.  
RESOURCES : To help guide development of Gender monitoring indicators –consider the following 
resources:  
- The World Bank’s PPP website with collated resources across the following sectors: 
Agriculture, Education, Energy, Health, Information and Communications Technology 
(ICT), Transport, Water and Sanitation. See:http://ppp.worldbank.org/public -private -
partners hip/ppp -sector/genderimpacts -ppps/sector -specific -materials/sector -specific -
materials  
- Asian Development Bank (2013) Tool Kit on Gender Equality Results and Indicators 
https://www.adb.org/documents/tool -kit-gender -equality -resultsand -indicators  
- The Gender Data Portal for the latest gender -disaggregated data and gender statistics 
covering demography, education, health, economic opportunities, public life and decision -
making, and agency, see http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/  
- GACC tool see http://cleancookstoves.org/resources/490.html  
 
EXAMPLE from ADB (2013)  Gender Equality Dimension: Voice and Rights  
Page 157


---
*Page 162*
---

SAMPLE INDICATORS  SAMPLE MONITORING PARAMETERS  
Women’s participation, leadership, 
and decision making are supported 
in water supply and sanitation 
(location, selection of technology, 
management, operation, and 
maintenance  
- Targets met for women’s 
participation and decision 
making in consultation 
process es, user groups, and 
committees  - Number and percentage of women and men 
who attend participatory planning and 
consultation meetings  
- Number and percentage of women and men 
involved in the selection of technology, 
location, operation, and management of 
impro ved water supply and sanitation  
- Number and percentage of women and men in 
water user groups  
- Number and percentage of women in 
leadership positions in water management 
committees and on boards of water utilities  
- Number and percentage of women involved in 
decision making on revenue and tariff 
arrangements (including identification of poor 
and vulnerable households for free or 
subsidized facilities)  
- Number and percentage of women in charge of 
operation, maintenance , and repair of facilities  
- Number and percentage of male and female 
facilitators and field staff working with water 
committees and community groups on design, 
planning, and consultation processes  
- Changes in the location or type of water supply 
or sanitatio n technology due to consultation 
with women  
- Changes to design, construction, management, 
cost recovery, or maintenance practices due to 
consultation with women  
- Views of women and men on changes in 
women’s household or community decision 
making due to their  involvement in water 
supply and sanitation committees or activities  
- Number of materials distributed to women or 
women’s organizations on entitlements to 
water and sanitation facilities, and number of 
mass campaigns with information on 
entitlements  
 
REQUI REMENTS  
Project developers should consider these aspects and establish the project's key gender indicators 
There are a few cross -cutting qualitative and quantitative issues that gender indicators can 
address:  
Page 158


---
*Page 163*
---

- At the monetary level: How much money, dollar for dollar, reaches women and girls at the 
local levels of consultation and how are decisions made around disbursement, use, 
investment and reinvestments?  
- At the empowerment level: How many women and how many m en are actively involved 
and engaged in reaching those decisions (about money disbursement, use, investment, and 
reinvestment) and in acting on those decisions? How many women participate in 
determining a valid indicator that best captures change for them?  
- At the environmental/ecological level: How are access points to natural resources that poor 
men and women depend protected? How are men and women involved in the decisions and 
actions around stewarding natural resources for future generations?  
- At the gend er-differentiated level: What kinds of gender -differentiated evidence, 
perspectives, narratives and realities are captured, recorded and learned from as a direct 
result of their own measurements of progress?  
REQUIREMENTS  
Track and record changes that the project can support both in terms of gender -equitable processes 
and in terms of Gender -Responsive performance.  
STEP 6: PROJECT CLAIM - GENDER ACTIONS  
REQUIREMENTS  
Describe how the project delivers on its commitment statement (end of step 4) and the pro posed 
project gender goals, actions and commitments (from step 5).  
10. What gender outcomes can this project realistically claim? Describe in one or two succinct and 
clear paragraphs.  
GENDER RESPONSIVE CHECKLIST:  
1) The gender analysis of the project examines:  
i. The different situations of women and men  
ii. The impacts the project will have on different groups  
2) The project collects and uses gender -disaggregated data and qualitative information to analyse 
and track gender issues  
3) Project is designed to meet the different needs and priorities of women and men  
4) The project monitoring framework includes gender -responsive targets and indicators to 
monitor gender equality results against the established baseline  
5) Women/gender focused groups, associations or gender units in part ner organisations are fully 
engaged and consulted with.  
 
  
Page 159


---
*Page 164*
---

 
i 2019, November 6, GCF: Updated Gender Policy and Gender Action Plan 2020 –2023 , page 3  
ii 2017, August, GCF: Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects, page 24  
iii 2020, May, CCSA: How COVID -19 is changing the world: a statistical perspective, page 40  
iv 2020, May, UN Women: https://data.unwomen.org/women -count  
v Gender and the economy. 2020.  Primer on the gendere d impacts of COVID -19.  
https://www.gendereconomy.org/primer -on-the-gendered -impacts -of-covid -19/ 
vi 2020, Northrop, E., et al. ‘‘A Sustainable and Equitable Blue Recovery to the COVID -19 Crisis.’’ Report. Washington, DC: 
World Resources Institute: http://w ww.oceanpanel.org/ bluerecovery , pages 15 -16 
vii https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/oceans -fisheries -and-coastal -economies  
viii 2017, The Green Climate Fund: Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects, page 32  
ix 2018, IUCN: Towards Ending Drought Emerg encies: Ecosystem Based Adaptation in Kenya’s Arid and Semi -Arid 
Rangelands  
x 2020, GCF: Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan Template  
xi 2017 August, GCF: Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects, page s 30-31 
xii xii 2020, Northrop, E., et al. ‘‘A Sustainable and Equitable Blue Recovery to the COVID -19 Crisis.’’ Report. Washington, 
DC: World Resources Institute: http://www.oceanpanel.org/ bluerecovery, pages 41 -42 
xiii 2020, Northrop, E., et al. ‘‘A Sustainable and Equit able Blue Recovery to the COVID -19 Crisis.’’ Report. Washington, DC: 
World Resources Institute: http://www.oceanpanel.org/ bluerecovery, page 15  
xiv 2020, Northrop, E., et al. ‘‘A Sustainable and Equitable Blue Recovery to the COVID -19 Crisis.’’ Report. Wash ington, DC: 
World Resources Institute: http://www.oceanpanel.org/ bluerecovery, pages 53 -54 
xv N.d., WWF: Empowering women in coastal communities, 
https://wwfeu.awsassets.panda .org/downloads/wwf_4_empowering.pdf  
xvi 2017 August, GCF: Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects , page s 30-31 
xvii 2019, UNWTO Global Report on Women in Tourism, Second Edition , page 12  
xviii 2019, UNWTO Global Report on Women in Tourism, Second Edition , page 70  
xix 2019, UNWTO Global Report on Women in Tourism, Second Edition , page 77  
xx 2019, UNWTO Global Report on Women in Tourism, Second Edition , page 50  
xxi 2012: Tran, L. and Walter, P.: Ecotourism, gender and development in northern Vietnam, Anna ls of Tourism Research, 
volume 44, pp. 116 –130 in UNWTO Global Report on Women in Tourism, Second Edition, page 145  
xxii 2017 August, GCF: Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects, page s 30-31 
xxiii 2002, Tibbetts , J.: “Coastal Cities: Living on the Ed ge,” Environmental Health Perspectives 110, no. 11: 674 -81. 
xxiv 2020, UNOPS: Infrastructure for gender equality and the empowerment of women , 
https://content.unops.org/publications/UNOPS -Infrastructure -for-Gender -Equality -and-the-Empowerme nt-of-
women.pdf?mtime=20200914194443&focal=none , page 15  
xxv 2003, Biliana Cicin -Sain et al., A Guide to Oceans, Coasts and Islands at the World Summit on Sustainable Development 
(August 2002), accessed online at www.gpa.unep.org/documents/WSSD/Oceans -Coasts -and-Islands -at-the-WSSD.pdf  
xxvi 2018, WHO: Water, sanitation and hygiene: measuring gender equality and empowerment  
xxvii 2019, Ocean Conservancy : The Role of Gender in Waste Management  
xxviii 2020, UNOPS: Infrastructure for gender equality and the empowerment of wo men , 
https://content.unops.org/publications/UNOPS -Infrastructure -for-Gender -Equality -and-the-Empowerment -of-
women.pdf?mtime=20200914194443&focal=none , page 12  
xxix N.d., UNEP: Gender Mainstrea ming in the Management of the Marine and Coastal Ecosystems, 
https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/27633/Gender_MarEco.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y  . p. 15  
xxx 2020, UNOPS: Infrastructure for gender equality and the empowerment of women , 
https://content.unops.org/publications/UNOPS -Infrastructure -for-Gender -Equality -and-the-Empowerme nt-of-
women.pdf?mtime=20200914194443&focal=none , page 16  
xxxi 2017, International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD) , Achieve Gender Equalit y to Deliver the SDGs  
xxxii Cotula and Blackmore (2014:51).  
xxxiii 2017, August, GCF: Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects, page 23  
Page 160